Chapter

30

AZMANJAKA/E+/GETTY IMAGES ; CARLOS FLORES/EYEEM/GETTY IMAGES

The Monetary
System

hen you buy a meal at Rosie’s Restaurant, you get
something of value—a full stomach. To pay for this
service, you might hand Rosie several worn-out pieces
of greenish paper decorated with strange symbols, government
buildings, and the portraits of famous dead Americans. Or you
might hand her a single piece of paper with a bank’s name and
your autograph. Or you may compensate Rosie using a plastic
card or a cell phone app. Whether you pay by cash, check, debit
card, or mobile transfer, the restaurateur is happy to work hard to
satisfy your gastronomical desires in exchange for these tokens of
value, which, in and of themselves, are worthless.
Anyone who has lived in a modern economy is familiar with this
social custom. Even though paper currency and digital debits have
no intrinsic value, Rosie is confident that, in the future, some third
person will accept them in exchange for something that she does
value. And that third person is confident that some fourth person
will accept the money, with the knowledge that yet a fifth person
will accept the money, and so on. To Rosie and other people, your
cash, check, debit card charge, or electronic payment represents a
claim to goods and services in the future.

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 615

13/09/22 6:34 PM

616

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

The social custom of using money for transactions is extraordinarily useful.
Imagine, for a moment, that an economy had no item widely accepted in exchange
for goods and services. People would have to rely on barter—the exchange of one
good or service for another—to obtain the things they need. To get a meal at Rosie’s
Restaurant, for instance, you would have to offer Rosie something of immediate
value to her. You could offer to wash some dishes, mow her lawn, or give her your
family’s secret recipe for meatloaf. An economy that relies on barter has trouble
allocating its scarce resources efficiently. In such an economy, trade requires the
double coincidence of wants—the unlikely occurrence that two people each have
a good or service that the other wants.
The existence of money makes trade much easier. Rosie does not care whether
you can produce a valuable good or service for her. She is happy to accept your
money, knowing that other people will do the same for her. This convention allows
trade to be roundabout. Rosie accepts your money and uses it to pay Tony, her chef;
Tony uses his paycheck to send his daughter Ava to day care; the day care center
uses Ava’s tuition to pay Mira, a teacher; and Mira hires you to mow her lawn. As
money flows from person to person, it facilitates production and trade, allowing
people to specialize in what they do best and raising everyone’s standard of living.
This chapter begins to examine the role of money in an economy. We discuss what
money is, the forms that money takes, how the banking system helps create money,
and how the government controls the quantity of money in circulation. The rest of
this book devotes much effort to studying how changes in the quantity of money
affect various economic variables, including inflation, interest rates, production, and
employment. Consistent with the long-run focus of the previous four chapters, the
next chapter examines the long-run effects of changes in the quantity of money. The
short-run effects of monetary changes are a more complex topic, which we take up
later. This chapter builds the foundation for this further analysis.

30-1 The Meaning of Money
money
the set of assets in an
economy that people
regularly use to buy
goods and services

What is money? This might seem like an odd question. When you read that Jeff
Bezos has a lot of money, you know what that means: He is so rich that he can buy
almost anything he wants. In this sense, the term money is used to mean wealth.
Economists, however, use the word in a more specific sense: Money is the set of
assets in the economy that people regularly use to buy goods and services from each
other. The cash in your wallet is money because you can use it to buy a meal at a
restaurant or a shirt at a store. By contrast, the large share of Amazon that makes up
much of Jeff Bezos’s wealth is not considered a form of money. Mr. Bezos could not
buy a meal or a shirt with this wealth without first obtaining some cash. According
to the economist’s definition, money includes only those few types of wealth that
sellers regularly accept in exchange for goods and services.

30-1a The Functions of Money
medium of exchange
an item that buyers give
to sellers when they want
to purchase goods and
services

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 616

Money has three functions: It is a medium of exchange, a unit of account, and a
store of value. These functions together distinguish money from other assets, such
as stocks, bonds, real estate, art, and even baseball cards. Let’s examine each of
these three functions.
A medium of exchange is an item that buyers give to sellers when they purchase
goods and services. When you buy a shirt, the store gives you the shirt, and you
give the store some money. This transfer of money from buyer to seller allows the

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

transaction to take place. When you go shopping, you are confident that stores will
accept your money for the items they sell because money is the commonly accepted
medium of exchange.
A unit of account is the yardstick people use to post prices and record debts.
When you shop, you might find that a shirt costs $60 and a hamburger costs $6. It
would be accurate to say that a shirt costs 10 hamburgers and a hamburger costs
1/10 of a shirt, but prices are rarely quoted in this way. Similarly, if you borrow
from a bank, your future loan repayments will be set in dollars, not in a quantity
of goods and services. When most people want to measure and record economic
value, they use money as the unit of account.
A store of value is an item that people can use to transfer purchasing power
from the present to the future. When sellers accept money today in exchange for
goods and services, they can hold the money and become buyers at another time.
Money is not the only store of value in the economy: A person can also transfer
purchasing power from the present to the future by holding nonmonetary assets
such as stocks and bonds. The term wealth refers to the total of all stores of value,
including both monetary and nonmonetary assets.
Economists use the term liquidity to describe the ease with which an asset can be
converted into the economy’s medium of exchange. Because money is the economy’s
medium of exchange, it is the most liquid asset available. Other assets vary widely
in liquidity. Most stocks and bonds can be sold easily at a low cost, so they are relatively liquid assets. By contrast, selling a house, a Rembrandt painting, or a 1948
Joe DiMaggio baseball card requires more time and effort, so these assets are less liquid.
When people decide how to allocate wealth, they balance the liquidity of each
possible asset against the asset’s usefulness as a store of value. Money is the most
liquid asset, but it is far from perfect as a store of value. When prices rise, the value
of money falls. In other words, when goods and services become more expensive,
a dollar buys less. This link between the price level and the value of money is key
to understanding how money affects the economy, a topic we start to explore in
the next chapter.

617

unit of account
the yardstick people use
to post prices and record
debts

store of value
an item that people
can use to transfer
purchasing power from
the present to the future

liquidity
the ease with which an
asset can be converted
into the economy’s
medium of exchange

30-1b The Kinds of Money
When money takes the form of a commodity with intrinsic value, it is called
commodity money. The term intrinsic value means that the item would have value
even if it were not used as money. An example of commodity money is gold. Gold
has intrinsic value because it is used in industry and for making jewelry. Today, we
no longer use gold as money, but historically, gold was a common form of money
because it is relatively easy to carry, measure, and verify for impurities. When an
economy uses gold as money (or uses paper money that is convertible into a specific amount of gold on demand), it is said to be operating under a gold standard.
Another example of commodity money is cigarettes. In prisoner-of-war camps
during World War II, prisoners traded goods and services with one another using
cigarettes as the store of value, unit of account, and medium of exchange. Similarly, as
the Soviet Union was breaking up in the late 1980s, cigarettes sometimes replaced the
ruble as the preferred currency in Moscow. In both cases, nonsmokers accepted cigarettes in an exchange, knowing they could use them to buy other goods and services.
Money without intrinsic value is called fiat money. A fiat is an order or decree,
and fiat money is established as money by government decree. For example, compare the paper dollars in your wallet (printed by the U.S. government) with the
paper dollars from a game of Monopoly (printed by the Hasbro game company).
Why can you use the first to pay your bill at a restaurant but not the second?

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 617

commodity money
money that takes the
form of a commodity with
intrinsic value

fiat money
money without intrinsic
value that is used as
money by government
decree

13/09/22 6:34 PM

618

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

Cryptocurrencies: A Fad or the Future?

I

n recent years, the world has seen a proliferation of a new kind of money
called cryptocurrencies. These currencies rely on cryptography—the
science of encoding information—to create a medium of exchange that
exists only in electronic form. They use a technology called blockchain
to maintain a public ledger that records transactions.
The first of these cryptocurrencies, introduced in 2009, was bitcoin.
It was conceived by a person or group who used the name Satoshi
Nakamoto. Nakamoto authored and circulated a white paper establishing the bitcoin protocol, but Nakamoto’s identity is otherwise unknown.
According to the protocol, people create bitcoins by using computers
to solve complex mathematical problems. The number of bitcoins that
can be “mined” in this way is supposedly limited to 21 million units.
Once created, bitcoins can be used in exchange. They can be bought
and sold for U.S. dollars on organized bitcoin exchanges, where supply
and demand determine the dollar price of a bitcoin. People can hold
bitcoins as a store of value, and they can use bitcoins to buy things
from any vendor who is willing to accept them. In essence, Nakamoto
created a virtual asset from nothing at all and ensured holders of it
that its supply would be forever limited.
Bitcoins are neither commodity money nor fiat money. Unlike commodity
money, they have no intrinsic value. You can’t use bitcoins for anything
other than exchange. Unlike fiat money, they are not created by government decree. Fans of bitcoin embrace this new form of money because it
exists apart from government. Some bitcoin users are engaged in illicit

transactions such as the drug trade and benefit from the anonymity that
bitcoin transactions offer.
During bitcoin’s brief history, its dollar value has fluctuated wildly. In
2010, the price of a bitcoin ranged between 5 cents to 39 cents. The price
rose above $1 in 2011 and above $1,000 in 2013 before falling below $500
in 2014. Over the following years, the dollar value of a bitcoin skyrocketed,
though the ride was bumpy. Bitcoin reached $60,000 in April 2021, fell
back to $31,000 in July 2021, rose to $67,000 in November 2021, and
then fell again to $20,000 in July 2022. Meanwhile, other cryptocurrencies
were introduced, such as Ethereum, Litecoin, Ripple, and Zcash, providing
competition for bitcoin. These other cryptocurrencies differ from bitcoin
in the details of their protocols, but like bitcoin, they have all exhibited
large price swings. Some newer cryptocurrencies, known as stablecoin, are
pegged to the dollar. Yet sometimes the peg has been impossible to sustain.
The long-term success of cryptocurrencies depends on whether they
succeed in performing the functions of money: a store of value, a unit
of account, and a medium of exchange. Many economists are skeptical.
The great volatility of the dollar prices of most cryptocurrencies makes
them a risky way to hold wealth and an inconvenient measure in which
to post prices. Few retailers accept them in exchange, at least so far. As
a result, cryptocurrencies have been excluded from standard measures
of the quantity of money.
Cryptocurrencies may be the money of the future or a passing fad.
Or they may become just a new niche asset class. ■

The answer is that the U.S. government has declared its dollars to be valid money.
Each paper dollar in your wallet reads: “This note is legal tender for all debts,
public and private.”
Although the government is central to establishing and regulating a system of fiat
money (by prosecuting counterfeiters, for example), other factors are also required
for the success of a monetary system. To a large extent, the acceptance of an asset as
money depends as much on expectations and social convention as on government
decree. The Soviet government in the 1980s didn’t abandon the ruble as the official
currency. Yet the people of Moscow often preferred American dollars or cigarettes
because they believed that these alternative monies were more reliable stores of
value and would continue to be accepted as mediums of exchange.

30-1c Money in the U.S. Economy
As we will see, the quantity of money circulating in the economy, called the money
stock, has a powerful influence on many economic variables. But first, we need to
ask a basic question: What is the quantity of money? Suppose you were given the
task of measuring how much money there is in the U.S. economy. What would you
include in your measure?

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 618

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

The most obvious asset to include is currency—the paper bills and coins in public hands. Currency is still the most widely accepted medium of exchange in our
economy. There is no doubt that it is part of the money stock.
Yet currency is not the only asset that you can use to buy goods and services. Many
businesses also accept personal checks. Wealth held in your checking account is almost
as convenient for buying things as wealth held in your wallet. To measure the money
stock, therefore, you might want to add demand deposits—balances in bank accounts
that depositors can access on demand simply by writing a check or swiping a debit card.
Once you include balances in checking accounts in the money stock, you are led to
consider other accounts held at banks and other financial institutions. Bank depositors
usually cannot write checks against the balances in their savings accounts, but they can
easily transfer funds from savings into checking accounts. In addition, depositors in
money market mutual funds can often write checks against their balances or use them
to pay bills electronically, though the number and size of these payments may be limited. Arguably, these other accounts should be counted as part of the U.S. money stock.
In a complex economy, it is hard to clearly distinguish between assets that can
be called “money” and those that cannot. Without a doubt, the coins in your pocket
are part of the money stock, and the Empire State Building is not. But many assets
lie between these extremes, making the choice less clear. Because different analysts
can reasonably disagree about where to draw the line between monetary and nonmonetary assets, various measures of the money stock are available.
For the U.S. economy, the two most widely followed measures of the money
stock are M1 and M2. M1 includes currency, demand deposits at banks, and some
other liquid deposits such as the balances in savings accounts. M2 includes everything in M1 plus small time deposits and money market funds (except those held
in restricted retirement accounts). For the purposes of this book, the differences
between the various measures of money aren’t crucial. The important point is that
the money stock includes not only currency but also deposits in banks and other
financial institutions that can be readily accessed and used to buy goods and services.

619

currency
the paper bills and coins
in the hands of the
public

demand deposits
balances in bank
accounts that depositors
can access on demand by
writing a check

Why Credit Cards Aren’t Money

I

t might seem natural to include credit cards as part of the economy’s
stock of money. After all, people often use credit cards to make purchases. Aren’t credit cards, therefore, a medium of exchange?
At first, this argument may seem persuasive, but credit cards are
excluded from all measures of the quantity of money. The reason is that
credit cards are not really a method of payment but rather a way of
deferring payment. When you buy a meal with a credit card, the bank
that issued the card pays the restaurant what it is due. At a later date,
you will repay the bank (perhaps with interest). When the time comes to
pay your credit card bill, you will probably do so by writing a check against
your checking account or by drawing money from it electronically. The
balance in this checking account is part of the economy’s stock of money.
Notice that despite their physical similarity, credit cards are different
from debit cards, which automatically withdraw funds from a bank account

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 619

to pay for items bought. Rather than allowing the user to postpone payment
for a purchase, a debit card gives the user immediate access to deposits
in a bank account. In this sense, a debit card is more like a check than a
credit card. The account balances that lie behind debit cards are included
in measures of the quantity of money.
Even though credit cards are not considered a form of money, they
are important for analyzing the monetary system. People who have credit
cards can pay many of their bills together at the end of the month rather
than sporadically as they make purchases. As a result, people with credit
cards probably hold less money on average than those without credit cards.
The wide availability of credit cards—along with the electronic payment
systems often linked to them—may reduce the amount of money that
people choose to hold. ■

13/09/22 6:34 PM

620

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

Case
Study

Where Is All the Currency?

One puzzle about the money stock of the U.S. economy concerns the
amount of currency. In November 2021, there was $2.1 trillion of currency outstanding. To put this number in perspective, we can divide
it by 262 million, the number of adults (age 16 and older) in the United States.
This calculation implies that there is more than $8,000 of currency per adult. Most
people are surprised by this figure because they carry far less in their wallets.
Who is holding all this currency? No one knows for sure, but there are two plausible explanations.
The first is that much of the currency is held abroad. In foreign countries without a
stable monetary system, people often prefer U.S. dollars to domestic assets. Estimates
suggest that more than half of U.S. dollars circulate outside the United States.
The second explanation is that much of the currency is held by drug dealers, tax
evaders, and other criminals. For most people in the U.S. economy, currency is not
a particularly good way to hold wealth: Not only can currency be lost or stolen, but
it also does not earn interest, whereas a bank deposit does. Thus, most people hold
only small amounts of currency. But criminals find currency more appealing. They
may avoid putting their money in banks, for instance, because a bank deposit gives
police a paper trail they can use to trace illegal activities. For criminals, currency
may be the best store of value available. ●

QuickQuiz
1. Fiat money is
a. a type of money with intrinsic value.
b. a type of money set by government decree.
c. any asset used as the medium of exchange.
d. any asset used as the unit of account.

2. The money stock includes all of the following
EXCEPT
a. metal coins.
b. paper currency.
c. lines of credit accessible with credit cards.
d. bank balances accessible with debit cards.
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

30-2 The Federal Reserve System
Federal Reserve (Fed)
the central bank of the
United States

central bank
an institution designed
to oversee the banking
system and regulate the
quantity of money in the
economy

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 620

Whenever an economy uses a system of fiat money, as the U.S. economy does, some
agency must be responsible for managing the system. In the United States, that
entity is the Federal Reserve, often simply called the Fed. If you look at the top of
a dollar bill, you will see that it is called a “Federal Reserve Note.” The Fed is an
example of a central bank—an institution designed to oversee the banking system
and regulate the quantity of money. Other major central banks around the world
include the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, and the European Central Bank.

30-2a The Fed’s Organization
The Federal Reserve was created in 1913 after a series of bank failures in 1907 convinced Congress that the United States needed a central bank to ensure the health of
the nation’s banking system. Today, the Fed is run by its Board of Governors, which
has up to seven members appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate. The
governors have 14-year terms. Just as federal judges are given lifetime appointments

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

to insulate them from politics, Fed governors are given long terms to give them independence from short-term political pressures when they formulate monetary policy.
Among the members of the Board of Governors, the most important is the chair.
The chair directs the Fed staff, presides over board meetings, and testifies regularly
about Fed policy in front of congressional committees. The president appoints the
chair to a 4-year term. As this book was going to press, the chair of the Fed was
Jerome Powell, who was nominated to the job by President Donald Trump in 2017
and reappointed by President Joe Biden in 2021.
The Federal Reserve System consists of the Federal Reserve Board in Washington,
D.C., and twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks located in major cities around
the country. The presidents of the regional banks are chosen by each bank’s board
of directors, whose members are typically drawn from the region’s banking and
business community.
The Fed has two related jobs. The first is to regulate banks and ensure the health
of the banking system. In particular, the Fed monitors each bank’s financial condition
and facilitates bank transactions by clearing checks. It also acts as a bank’s bank.
That is, the Fed makes loans to banks when banks themselves need funds. The Fed
acts as a lender of last resort—a lender to those who cannot borrow anywhere
else—to maintain stability in the overall banking system.
The Fed’s second job is to control the quantity of money available in the economy,
called the money supply, which in the short run is closely connected to the level of
interest rates. Decisions by policymakers concerning the money supply and interest
rates constitute monetary policy. At the Federal Reserve, monetary policy is made
by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The FOMC meets about every six
weeks in Washington, D.C., to discuss the condition of the economy and consider
changes in monetary policy.

30-2b The Federal Open Market Committee

621

money supply
the quantity of money
available in the economy

monetary policy
the setting of the money
supply by policymakers in
the central bank

The Federal Open Market Committee consists of the members of the Board of
Governors and five of the twelve regional bank presidents. All twelve regional
presidents attend each FOMC meeting, but only five get to vote. Voting rights rotate
among the twelve regional presidents. The president of the New York Fed always
gets a vote, however, because New York is the country’s traditional financial center
and because all Fed purchases and sales of government bonds are conducted at the
New York Fed’s trading desk.
Through the decisions of the FOMC, the Fed has the power to increase or decrease
the number of dollars in the economy. In simple metaphorical terms, imagine the Fed
expanding the money supply by printing dollar bills and dropping them around the
country from a helicopter. Similarly, imagine it reducing the money supply with a
giant vacuum cleaner that sucks dollar bills out of people’s wallets. In reality, the Fed’s
methods for changing the money supply are complex and subtle, but the helicoptervacuum metaphor is a good first step to an understanding of monetary policy.
Later, this chapter discusses the many ways the Fed can influence the money supply without using a helicopter or vacuum, but it is worth noting here that the Fed’s
primary tool has historically been the open-market operation—the purchase and
sale of U.S. government bonds. Recall that a U.S. government bond is a certificate
of indebtedness of the federal government. To increase the money supply, the Fed
can create dollars and use them to buy government bonds from the public in the
bond markets. After the purchase, these dollars are in public hands. In this way, the
Fed’s open-market purchase of bonds increases the money supply. Conversely, to
decrease the money supply, the Fed can sell government bonds from its portfolio

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 621

13/09/22 6:34 PM

622

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

to the public in the bond markets. After the sale, the dollars the Fed receives for
the bonds are out of public hands. The Fed’s open-market sale of bonds thereby
decreases the money supply. In recent years, the Fed has relied less on open-market
operations and more on other tools of monetary policy, as we will see.
Central banks are important institutions because changes in the money supply
can profoundly affect the economy. One of the Ten Principles of Economics in
Chapter 1 is that prices rise when the government prints too much money. Another
of the Ten Principles of Economics is that society faces a short-run trade-off between
inflation and unemployment. The power of the Fed rests on these principles. For
reasons discussed more fully in coming chapters, the Fed’s policy decisions are
key determinants of inflation in the long run and employment and production
in the short run. The Fed chair has been called the second most powerful person
in the United States.

QuickQuiz
3. Which of the following is NOT true about the Federal
Reserve?
a. It was established by the U.S. Constitution.
b. It regulates the banking system.
c. It lends to banks.
d. It can own government bonds.

4. If the Fed wants to increase the money supply, it can
a. raise income tax rates.
b. reduce income tax rates.
c. buy bonds in open-market operations.
d. sell bonds in open-market operations.
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

MICK STEVENS

30-3 Banks and the Money Supply

“I’ve heard a lot about
money, and now I’d like to
try some.”

reserves
deposits that banks have
received but have not
loaned out

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 622

So far, we have introduced the concept of “money” and discussed how the
Fed controls the money supply. This explanation is correct, but it is incomplete
because it omits the key role that banks play in the monetary system.
Recall that the money you hold includes both currency (the bills in your
wallet and coins in your pocket) and demand deposits (the balance in your
checking account). Because demand deposits are held in banks, the behavior
of banks can influence the quantity of demand deposits and, therefore, the
money supply. This section examines how banks affect the money supply and
complicate the Fed’s job of controlling the money supply.

30-3a The Simple Case of 100-Percent-Reserve Banking
To see how banks influence the money supply, let’s first imagine a world without any banks at all. In this simple world, currency is the only form of money.
To be concrete, suppose that the total quantity of currency is $100. The supply
of money is, therefore, $100.
Now suppose that someone opens a bank, appropriately called First National
Bank. First National Bank is only a depository institution—that is, it accepts deposits
but does not make loans. The purpose of the bank is to give depositors a safe place
to keep their money. Whenever people make a deposit, the bank keeps the money
in its vault until the depositors withdraw it, write checks, or use a debit card to
access their balances. Deposits that banks have received but have not loaned out
are called reserves. In this imaginary economy, all deposits are held as reserves, so
this system is called 100-percent-reserve banking.

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

623

We can express the financial position of First National Bank with a T-account,
which is a simplified accounting statement that shows a bank’s assets and liabilities. Here is the T-account for First National Bank if the economy’s entire $100 of
money is deposited in the bank:
First National Bank
Assets

Reserves

Liabilities

$100.00

Deposits

$100.00

On the left side of the T-account are the bank’s assets of $100 (the reserves it holds
in its vaults). On the right side are the bank’s liabilities of $100 (the amount it owes
to its depositors). Because the assets and liabilities balance, this accounting statement is called a balance sheet.
Now consider this economy’s money supply. Before the start of First National
Bank, it is the $100 of currency that people are holding. After the bank opens and
people deposit their currency, the money supply is the $100 of demand deposits.
(There is no longer any currency outstanding because it is all in the bank vault.)
Each deposit reduces currency and raises demand deposits by exactly the same
amount, leaving the money supply unchanged. Thus, if banks hold all deposits
in reserve, banks do not influence the supply of money.

30-3b Money Creation with Fractional-Reserve Banking
Eventually, the people who run First National Bank may reconsider their policy
of 100-percent-reserve banking. Leaving all that money idle in their vaults seems
unnecessary. Why not lend some of it out and earn a profit by charging interest
on the loans? Families buying houses, firms building new factories, and students
paying for college would all be willing to pay interest to borrow some of that
money for a while. First National Bank has to keep some reserves so that currency
is available if depositors want to make withdrawals. But if the flow of new deposits
is roughly the same as the flow of withdrawals, First National needs to keep only
a fraction of its deposits in reserve. And so First National adopts a system called
fractional‑reserve banking.
The fraction of total deposits that a bank holds as reserves is called the reserve
ratio. This ratio is determined by a combination of government regulation and
bank policy. As the chapter will discuss more fully later, the Fed traditionally set a
minimum amount of reserves that banks must hold, called a reserve requirement. In
addition, banks may hold reserves above the legal minimum, called excess reserves,
so they can be more confident that they will not run short of cash. For our purpose
here, we take the reserve ratio as given to examine how fractional-reserve banking
influences the money supply.
Suppose that First National has a reserve ratio of 1/10, or 10 percent. This means
that it keeps 10 percent of its deposits in reserve and lends out the rest. Now look
again at the bank’s T-account:

fractional‑reserve
banking
a banking system in
which banks hold only
a fraction of deposits as
reserves

reserve ratio
the fraction of deposits
that banks hold as
reserves

First National Bank
Assets

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 623

Liabilities

Reserves

$10.00

Loans

90.00

Deposits

$100.00

13/09/22 6:34 PM

624

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

First National still has $100 in liabilities because making the loans did not alter the
bank’s obligation to its depositors. But now, the bank has two kinds of assets: $10 of
reserves in its vault and $90 of loans. (These loans are liabilities of the people borrowing from First National, but they are assets of the bank because the borrowers
will repay the loans.) In total, First National’s assets still equal its liabilities.
Once again, consider the economy’s supply of money. Before First National makes
any loans, the money supply is the $100 of deposits. Yet when First National lends out
some of these deposits, the money supply increases. The depositors still have demand
deposits totaling $100, but now the borrowers hold $90 in currency. The money supply (which equals currency plus demand deposits) equals $190. Thus, when banks
hold only a fraction of deposits in reserve, the banking system creates money.
At first, this creation of money by fractional-reserve banking may seem too
good to be true: It appears that the bank has created money out of thin air. To
make this feat seem less miraculous, note that when First National Bank lends
out some of its reserves and creates money, it does not create any wealth. Loans
from First National give the borrowers some currency, which augments their
ability to buy goods and services. Yet the borrowers are also incurring debts, so
the loans do not make them richer. In other words, as a bank creates the asset of
money, it also creates a corresponding liability for those who borrowed the created
money. At the end of this process of money creation, the economy is more liquid
in the sense that there is more of the medium of exchange, but the economy is no
wealthier than before.

30-3c The Money Multiplier
The creation of money does not stop with First National Bank. Suppose the borrower from First National uses the $90 to buy something from someone who then
deposits the currency in Second National Bank. Here is the T-account for Second
National Bank:
Second National Bank
Assets

Liabilities

Reserves

$ 9.00

Loans

81.00

Deposits

$90.00

After the deposit, Second National has liabilities of $90. If Second National also
has a reserve ratio of 10 percent, it keeps assets of $9 in reserve and makes $81 in
loans. In this way, Second National creates an additional $81 of money. If this $81
is eventually deposited in Third National Bank, which also has a reserve ratio of
10 percent, Third National keeps $8.10 in reserve and makes $72.90 in loans. Here
is the T-account for Third National Bank:
Third National Bank
Assets

Liabilities

Reserves

$ 8.10

Loans

72.90

Deposits

$81.00

The process goes on and on. Each time that money is deposited and a bank loan is
made, more money is created.

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 624

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

625

After all this money creation, how much money is there in this economy? Let’s
add it up:
Original deposit

5 $100.00

First National lending

5 $90.00 (5 .9 3 $100.00)

Second National lending 5 $81.00 (5 .9 3 $90.00)
Third National lending

5 $72.90 (5 .9 3 $81.00)

•
•
•

•
•
•

Total money supply

5 $1,000.00

It turns out that even though this process of money creation can continue forever,
it does not create an infinite amount of money. If you laboriously add the infinite
sequence of numbers in the preceding example, you find that the $100 of reserves
generates $1,000 of money. The amount of money that results from each dollar of
reserves is called the money multiplier. In this economy, where the $100 of reserves
generates $1,000 of money, the money multiplier is 10.
What determines the size of the money multiplier? It turns out the answer is
simple: The money multiplier is the reciprocal of the reserve ratio. If R is the
reserve ratio for all banks in the economy, then each dollar of reserves generates
1/R dollars of money. In our example, R 5 1/10, so the money multiplier is 10.
Consider why this reciprocal formula for the money multiplier makes sense. If a
bank holds $1,000 in deposits, then a reserve ratio of 1/10 (10 percent) means that
the bank must hold $100 in reserves. The money multiplier turns this idea around:
If the banking system as a whole holds a total of $100 in reserves, it can have only
$1,000 in deposits. In other words, if R is the ratio of reserves to deposits at each
bank (that is, the reserve ratio), then the ratio of deposits to reserves in the banking
system (that is, the money multiplier) must be 1/R.
This formula shows how the amount of money banks create depends on the
reserve ratio. If the reserve ratio were only 1/20 (5 percent), then the banking system
would have 20 times as much in deposits as in reserves, implying a money multiplier of 20. Each dollar of reserves would generate $20 of money. Similarly, if the
reserve ratio were 1/4 (25 percent), deposits would be 4 times reserves, the money
multiplier would be 4, and each dollar of reserves would generate $4 of money. The
higher the reserve ratio, the less of each deposit banks loan out, and the smaller
the money multiplier. In the special case of 100-percent-reserve banking, the reserve
ratio is 1, the money multiplier is 1, and banks do not make loans or create money.

money multiplier
the amount of money
that results from each
dollar of reserves

30-3d Bank Capital, Leverage, and the Financial Crisis
of 2008–2009
The previous sections presented a simplified explanation of how banks work. The
reality of modern banking is more complex, and this complexity played an important
role in the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009. To understand such financial crises, we
need a bit more background about how banks actually function.
In the bank balance sheets examined so far, a bank accepts deposits and either uses
those deposits to make loans or holds them as reserves. More realistically, though,
a bank gets financial resources not only from accepting deposits but also, like other
companies, from issuing equity and debt. The resources that a bank obtains from

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 625

13/09/22 6:34 PM

626

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

bank capital
the resources a bank’s
owners have put into the
institution

issuing equity to its owners are called bank capital. A bank uses these financial
resources in a variety of ways to generate profit for its owners. In addition to making
loans and holding reserves, it can buy financial securities, such as stocks and bonds.
Here is a somewhat more realistic example of a bank’s balance sheet:
More Realistic National Bank
Assets

leverage
the use of borrowed
money to supplement
existing funds for
investment purposes

leverage ratio
the ratio of assets to
bank capital

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 626

Liabilities and Owners’ Equity

Reserves

$200

Deposits

$800

Loans

700

Debt

150

Securities

100

Capital (owners’ equity)

50

On the right side of this balance sheet are the bank’s liabilities and capital (also
called owners’ equity). This bank obtained $50 in capital from its owners. It also
issued $150 of debt and took in $800 of deposits. It used the total of $1,000 in three
ways, listed on the left side of the balance sheet, which shows the bank’s assets.
This bank held $200 in reserves, made $700 in loans, and used $100 to buy financial
securities, such as government or corporate bonds. The bank decides how to allocate
its resources among asset classes based on their risk and return as well as on any
regulations that restrict its choices.
By the rules of accounting, the reserves, loans, and securities on the left side of
the balance sheet always equal, in total, the deposits, debt, and capital on the right
side. There is no magic in this equality. It occurs because the value of the owners’
equity is, by definition, the value of the bank’s assets (reserves, loans, and securities)
minus the value of its liabilities (deposits and debt). Therefore, the left and right
sides of the balance sheet always sum to the same total.
Many businesses rely on leverage, the use of borrowed money to supplement
existing funds for the purposes of investment. Whenever a business uses debt to
finance an investment project, it is applying leverage. For banks, leverage is particularly important because borrowing and lending are at the heart of what they
do. To better understand banking, let’s look more closely at how leverage works.
The leverage ratio is the ratio of the bank’s total assets to bank capital. In this
example, the leverage ratio is $1,000/$50, or 20. A leverage ratio of 20 means that
for every dollar of capital the bank owners have contributed, the bank has $20 of
assets. Of the $20 of assets, $19 are financed with borrowed money—either by taking in deposits or issuing debt.
You may have learned in a science class that a lever can amplify a force: A boulder
you cannot move with your arms alone will move more easily if you use a lever.
A similar amplification occurs with bank leverage. To see how, suppose that the
bank’s assets increase in value by 5 percent because, say, some of the securities
held by the bank rise in price. The $1,000 of assets is now worth $1,050. Because the
depositors and debt holders are still owed $950, bank capital increases from $50 to
$100 ($1050 − $950). Thus, when the leverage ratio is 20, a 5-percent appreciation
in asset values increases the owners’ equity by 100 percent.
The same principle works on the downside but with troubling consequences.
Suppose that some people who borrowed from the bank default on their loans,
reducing the value of the bank’s assets by 5 percent to $950. Once again, the depositors and debt holders are still owed $950, so the value of the owners’ equity falls to
zero ($950 − $950). Thus, when the leverage ratio is 20, a 5-percent fall in the value
of the bank’s assets leads to a 100-percent fall in bank capital. If the value of assets

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

were to fall by more than 5 percent, the bank’s assets would fall below its liabilities.
In this case, the bank would be insolvent, and it would be unable to pay off its debt
holders and depositors in full.
Bank regulators require banks to hold a certain amount of capital. The goal of
such a capital requirement is to ensure that banks will be able to pay off their
depositors (without having to resort to government-provided deposit insurance
funds). The amount of capital required depends on the kind of assets a bank holds.
Other things being equal, a bank that holds risky assets such as loans to borrowers
whose credit is of dubious quality is required to hold more capital than a bank that
holds safe assets such as government bonds.
Economic turmoil can result when banks find themselves with too little capital to
satisfy capital requirements. An example of this phenomenon arose in 2007 and 2008,
when many banks incurred sizable losses on some of their assets—specifically, mortgage loans and securities backed by mortgage loans. The capital shortage induced
banks to reduce lending, a phenomenon called a credit crunch, which contributed
to a severe downturn in economic activity. (Chapter 34 discusses this event more
fully.) To address the problem, the U.S. Treasury, working with the Fed, put many
billions of dollars of public funds into the banking system to increase bank capital.
As a result, the U.S. taxpayer temporarily became a part owner of many banks. The
goal of this unusual policy was to recapitalize the banking system so that lending
could return to a more normal level. And, in fact, by late 2009, it did.

627

capital requirement
a government regulation
specifying a minimum
amount of bank capital

QuickQuiz
5. Isabella takes $100 of currency from her wallet and
deposits it into her checking account. If the bank
adds the entire $100 to reserves, the money supply
________, but if the bank lends out some of the
$100, the money supply ________.
a. increases; increases even more
b. increases; increases by less
c. is unchanged; increases
d. decreases; decreases by less

7. A bank has capital of $200 and a leverage ratio
of 5. If the value of the bank’s assets declines by
10 percent, then its capital will be reduced to
a. $100.
b. $150.
c. $180.
d. $185.

6. If the reserve ratio is ¼ and the central bank increases the quantity of reserves in the banking system by
$120, the money supply increases by
a. $90.
b. $150.
c. $160.
d. $480.
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

30-4 The Fed’s Tools of Monetary Control
The Federal Reserve is responsible for controlling the supply of money, and it carries
out this job in subtle and evolving ways. Because banks create money in a system of
fractional-reserve banking, the Fed’s control of the money supply is indirect. When
the Fed decides to change the money supply, it must consider how its actions will
work through the banking system.

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 627

13/09/22 6:34 PM

628

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

The Fed has a variety of tools in its monetary toolbox, and, over time, its use
of them changes. We can group the tools into two groups: those that influence
the quantity of reserves and those that influence the reserve ratio and thereby the
money multiplier.

30-4a How the Fed Influences the Quantity of Reserves
The first way the Fed can alter the money supply is by changing the quantity of
reserves. The Fed does this by conducting open-market operations or by lending
to banks.
open‑market
operations
the purchase and sale of
U.S. government bonds
by the Fed

discount rate
the interest rate on the
loans that the Fed makes
to banks

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 628

Open-Market Operations As noted earlier, the Fed conducts open‑market
operations when it buys or sells government bonds. To increase the money supply,
it instructs its bond traders at the New York Fed to buy bonds from the public in
the nation’s bond markets. By paying for the bonds with newly created dollars,
the Fed increases the number of dollars in the economy. Some of these new dollars
are held as currency, and some are deposited in banks. Each new dollar held as
currency increases the money supply by exactly $1. Each new dollar deposited
in a bank increases the money supply by more than a dollar because it increases
reserves and thereby increases the amount of money that the banking system
can create.
To reduce the money supply, the Fed does just the opposite: It sells government bonds in the nation’s bond markets. The public pays for these bonds with its
holdings of currency and bank deposits, directly reducing the amount of money
in circulation. In addition, as people make withdrawals from banks to buy these
bonds from the Fed, banks find themselves with a smaller quantity of reserves. In
response, banks reduce the amount of lending, and the process of money creation
reverses itself.
Open-market operations are easy to conduct. In fact, the Fed’s purchases and
sales of government bonds in the nation’s bond markets are like the transactions
that people might undertake for their own investment portfolios. There is, however,
an important difference: When two individuals engage in a trade with each other,
money changes hands, but the amount of money in circulation remains the same.
By contrast, when the Fed is a party in the transaction, the money supply changes.
Open-market operations are the tool of monetary policy that the Fed has historically used most often.
Fed Lending to Banks The Fed can also increase the quantity of reserves by lending reserves to banks. Banks borrow from the Fed when they do not have enough
reserves on hand either to satisfy bank regulators, meet depositor withdrawals,
make new loans, or for some other business reason.
There are several ways for banks to borrow from the Fed. Traditionally, they borrow from the Fed’s discount window and pay an interest rate on that loan called
the discount rate. When the Fed makes such a loan to a bank, the banking system
has more reserves than it otherwise would, and these additional reserves allow the
banking system to create more money.
The Fed can alter the money supply by changing the discount rate. A higher discount rate discourages banks from borrowing from the Fed, decreasing the quantity
of reserves in the banking system and, in turn, the money supply. Conversely, a lower
discount rate encourages banks to borrow from the Fed, increasing the quantity of
reserves and the money supply.

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

629

At times, the Fed has set up other mechanisms for banks to borrow from it. For
example, from 2007 to 2010, under the Term Auction Facility, the Fed set a quantity
of funds it wanted to lend to banks, and eligible banks then bid to borrow those
funds. The loans went to the highest eligible bidders—that is, to the banks that
had acceptable collateral and offered to pay the highest interest rate. Unlike at the
discount window, where the Fed sets the price of a loan and the banks determine
the quantity of borrowing, at the Term Auction Facility, the Fed set the quantity of
borrowing, and competitive bidding among banks determined the price. The more
funds the Fed made available, the greater the quantity of reserves and the larger
the money supply.
The Fed lends to banks not only to control the money supply but also to help
financial institutions when they are in trouble. For example, when the stock market
crashed by 22 percent on October 19, 1987, many Wall Street brokerage firms found
themselves temporarily in need of funds to finance the high volume of stock trading. The next morning, before the stock market opened, Fed Chair Alan Greenspan
announced the Fed’s “readiness to serve as a source of liquidity to support the
economic and financial system.” Many economists believe that Greenspan’s reaction
to the stock crash was an important reason it had few repercussions.
Similarly, in 2008 and 2009, a fall in housing prices throughout the United States
led to a sharp rise in the number of homeowners defaulting on their mortgage
loans, and many financial institutions holding those mortgages ran into trouble.
In an attempt to prevent these events from having broader economic ramifications, the Fed provided many billions of dollars in loans to financial institutions
in distress.
Once again, early in 2020, when the stock and bond markets tumbled in response
to the coronavirus pandemic, the Fed acted as the lender of last resort and embarked
on new programs to add liquidity to the economy. Fed Chair Jerome Powell pledged
to support banks and the economy “until we are confident that we are solidly on
the road to recovery.”

30-4b How the Fed Influences the Reserve Ratio
In addition to influencing the quantity of reserves, the Fed changes the money supply by influencing the reserve ratio and the money multiplier. The Fed can influence
the reserve ratio either through regulating the quantity of reserves banks must hold
or through the interest rate that the Fed pays banks on their reserves.

Reserve Requirements One way the Fed can influence the reserve ratio is by
altering reserve requirements, the regulations that set the minimum amount of
reserves that banks must hold against their deposits. An increase in reserve requirements means that banks must hold more reserves and can lend out less of each
dollar of deposits, reducing how much money the banking system can create. In
other words, an increase in reserve requirements raises the reserve ratio, lowers the
money multiplier, and reduces the money supply. Conversely, a decrease in reserve
requirements lowers the reserve ratio, raises the money multiplier, and increases
the money supply.
This policy tool became less relevant after 2008 because banks began to hold
substantial reserves above the required level. In March 2020, the Fed set required
reserves to zero, in effect eliminating reserve requirements. It is necessary to be
aware of reserve requirements, nonetheless. They have been historically important
and could be again in the future.

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 629

reserve requirements
regulations on the
minimum amount of
reserves that banks must
hold against deposits

13/09/22 6:34 PM

630

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

interest on reserves
the interest rate paid to
banks on the reserves
held in deposit at
the Fed

Interest on Reserves Traditionally, bank reserves did not earn interest. In October
2008, however, this changed, and the Fed began paying interest on reserves. That
is, when banks deposit their reserves at the Fed, the Fed pays them interest on these
deposits, much like a bank might pay you interest on your savings account. This
change in policy explains why reserve requirements are no longer necessary: Once
reserves became an interest-bearing asset, banks were more willing to hold them
without being required to do so.
As a result, the Fed has another tool with which to influence the economy.
The higher the interest rate on reserves, the more reserves banks choose to hold.
An increase in the interest rate on reserves tends to increase the reserve ratio, reduce
the money multiplier, and reduce the money supply. Conversely, a decrease in the
interest rate on reserves tends to reduce the reserve ratio, increase the money multiplier, and increase the money supply.
Since interest on reserves was introduced in 2008, it has become one of the most
important tools of monetary policy. As we will see, recent Fed policy has emphasized
a short-term target for the federal funds rate, an interest rate on overnight loans
between banks. The interest rate the Fed pays on reserves is an especially useful
tool for achieving its target for the federal funds rate.

30-4c Problems in Controlling the Money Supply
The Fed’s various tools—open-market operations, bank lending, reserve requirements, and interest on reserves—have powerful effects on the money supply. Yet
the Fed’s control of the money supply is not precise. The Fed has at times wrestled
with two problems, each of which arises because much of the money supply is created through fractional-reserve banking.
The first problem is that the Fed does not control the amount of money that households choose to hold as deposits in banks. The more money households deposit, the
more reserves banks have, and the more money the banking system can create. The
less money households deposit, the less reserves banks have, and the less money
the banking system can create. To see why this is a problem, suppose that one day,
people lose confidence in the banking system and withdraw some of their deposits
to hold more currency. When this happens, the banking system loses reserves and
creates less money. The money supply falls, even without any Fed action.
The second problem of monetary control is that the Fed does not control the
amount that bankers choose to lend. When money is deposited in a bank, it creates
more money only when the bank loans it out. Because banks can choose to hold
excess reserves instead, the Fed cannot be sure how much money the banking system
will create. For instance, suppose that one day, bankers become more cautious about
economic conditions and decide to make fewer loans and hold greater reserves. In
this case, the banking system creates less money than it otherwise would. Because
of the bankers’ decision, the money supply falls.
That’s why, in a system of fractional-reserve banking, the amount of money in
the economy depends partly on the behavior of depositors and bankers. Because the
Fed cannot control or perfectly predict this behavior, it cannot precisely control the
money supply. Yet if the Fed is vigilant, these problems need not be large. The Fed
collects data on deposits and reserves from banks every week, so it quickly becomes
aware of changes in depositor or banker behavior and can respond accordingly.
Moreover, as we will discuss shortly, the Fed has recently conducted policy by
setting a target for interest rates rather than a target for the money supply. This
approach automatically alters the quantity of reserves to accommodate the changing attitudes of bankers and bank depositors.

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 630

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

Case
Study

631

Bank Runs and the Money Supply

MOVIESTORE COLLECTION LTD/
ALAMY STOCK PHOTO

You may never have witnessed a bank run in real life, but perhaps
you have seen one depicted in movies such as Mary Poppins or It’s
a Wonderful Life. A bank run is a form of mass panic, which occurs
when depositors fear that a bank may be having financial troubles and “run” to
the bank to withdraw their deposits. The United States has not seen a major bank
run since the Great Depression of the 1930s, but in the United Kingdom, a bank
called Northern Rock experienced a run in 2007 and was eventually taken over
by the government.
Bank runs are a problem for banks under fractional-reserve banking. Because a
bank holds only a fraction of its deposits in reserve, it cannot satisfy withdrawal
requests from all depositors if they occur simultaneously. Even if the bank is solvent (meaning that its assets exceed its liabilities), it will not have enough cash
on hand to allow all depositors immediate access to all their money. When a run
occurs, the bank is forced to close its doors until some bank loans are repaid or
until some lender of last resort (such as the Fed) provides it with the currency it
needs to satisfy depositors.
Bank runs complicate the control of the money supply. Consider what happened in the early 1930s. After a wave of bank runs and bank closings, households and bankers became more cautious. Households withdrew their deposits
from banks, preferring to hold their money as currency. This decision reversed
the process of money creation, as bankers responded to falling reserves by reducing bank loans. At the same time, bankers increased their reserve ratios so they
would have enough cash on hand to meet their depositors’ demands in future
bank runs. The higher reserve ratio reduced the money multiplier and thereby
further reduced the money supply. From 1929 to 1933, the money supply fell by
28 percent without the Fed taking any deliberate contractionary action. Many
economists point to this massive fall in the money supply to explain the high
unemployment and falling prices that prevailed during this period. (Future
chapters examine the mechanisms by which changes in the money supply affect
employment and prices.)
Today, bank runs are not a major problem for the U.S. banking system, partly
because of reforms enacted after the crisis of the 1930s. The federal government
now guarantees the safety of deposits at most banks, primarily through the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Depositors do not make runs on their banks
because they are confident that, even if their bank goes bankrupt, the FDIC will
make good on the deposits.
Yet panicky investors sometimes flee other financial institutions
that lack government deposit insurance, leading to events that
resemble bank runs. For example, in 2008 and again in 2020, people
started to doubt the soundness of money market mutual funds,
which are technically not banks but have some bank-like characteristics. The Fed was concerned that massive withdrawals from
these funds would disrupt their lending, roil financial markets, and
depress economic activity. In both cases, the Fed stepped in to add
liquidity and restore stability.
The policy of government deposit insurance has been successful
in maintaining the public’s confidence in the banking system, but it
has downsides as well. Bankers whose deposits are guaranteed may
have too little incentive to avoid bad credit risks when lending. They
A not-so-wonderful bank run

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 631

13/09/22 6:34 PM

632

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

may think, “Heads the bank wins, tails the taxpayers lose.” That’s why regulators
keep a close eye on the riskiness of banks’ assets.
As for bank runs, most people now see them only in the movies. ●

30-4d The Federal Funds Rate
If you read about U.S. monetary policy in the news, you will find much discussion
of the federal funds rate. This raises several questions:
federal funds rate
the interest rate at which
banks make overnight
loans to one another

In the
News

Q: What is the federal funds rate?
A: The federal funds rate is the short-term interest rate that banks charge
one another for loans. If a bank finds itself short of reserves, it can borrow
reserves from another bank. The loans are temporary—typically overnight. The price of the loan is the federal funds rate.
Q: How does the federal funds rate differ from the interest rate paid on
reserves?

A Trip to Jekyll Island

Here’s the story of how the Federal
Reserve came into being.

The stranger-than-fiction story
of how the Fed was created
By Roger Lowenstein

A

ccording to opinion surveys, no institution
save the Internal Revenue Service is held in
lower regard than the Federal Reserve. It’s also
a font of conspiracy theories stoked by radical
libertarians, who insist the Fed is debauching the
currency and will ultimately bankrupt the country.
The Fed’s unpopularity would make sense
if it had, say, failed to intervene and save the
system during the 2008 financial crisis. But, in
fact, the Fed did rescue the economy….
Nonetheless, dissatisfaction is alive in
Congress, where various bills would strip the
Fed’s autonomy and subject sensitive monetary
decisions to the scrutiny of elected politicians.
Some bills would go even further and explore a
return to the gold standard.

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 632

For central bank watchers, this dynamic—
effective policy rewarded with populist scorn—
is nothing new. In America, it has always been
thus.
At Alexander Hamilton’s urging, Congress
first chartered a national bank—the ur-Fed—
in 1791. However, Thomas Jefferson, who
famously mistrusted banks (he thought agriculture more virtuous), and who was fearful
of a strong central government, opposed this
development. After 20 years, the Jeffersonians
won and Congress let the charter expire.
This decision led to disaster: ruinous inflation. So Congress chartered a Second Bank
of the United States, which began in 1817,
providing the growing country with a better,
more uniform currency and improved its public
finances. But success couldn’t save it. Andrew
Jackson despised the Second Bank as a tool of
East Coast elites, and it too was abolished.
For most of the 19th century, the U.S.,
unlike most nations in Europe, did not have
a lender of last resort. Frequent panics and
credit shortages were the result. Yet some of
the very people who could have benefited most

from a central bank, such as farmers who were
starved for credit, preferred the status quo.
Like Jackson and Jefferson before them, they
were fearful that a government bank would
tyrannize the people, perhaps in cahoots with
Wall Street.
After a financial panic in 1907 virtually
shut down the banking system, reformers began
to press once more for a central bank. But popular mistrust remained so pronounced that they
were afraid to go public.
This is the point—105 years ago—when
the story seems to have been hijacked by a
future Hollywood scriptwriter.
On a November evening in 1910, a powerful senator, Rhode Island Republican Nelson
W. Aldrich, boarded his private rail car near
New York. A light snow was falling, muting
the hushed, conspiratorial tones of his guests,
which is exactly how Aldrich wanted it.
The reform-minded banker Paul Warburg,
one of his guests, was toting a hunting rifle,
but he had no interest in hunting. The party
also included a member of the powerful Morgan
bank, as well as an assistant U.S. Treasury

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

633

secretary, and Frank Vanderlip, head of the
country’s largest bank, National City.
”On what sort of errand are we going?”
Vanderlip inquired.
”It may be a wild-goose chase; it may the
biggest thing you and I ever did,” Warburg
replied.
Masquerading as duck hunters, they disembarked in Brunswick, Ga., and traveled by
launch to Jekyll Island, home of an exclusive
club surrounded by pine and palmetto groves.
Over the course of a week, Aldrich and his
bankers mapped out a draft of what was to
become the Federal Reserve Act, changing the
U.S. economy forever.
Congress was never told that Aldrich’s bill
had been drafted by Wall Street moguls. His
bill did not pass, but it was the basis of a
successor bill, the Federal Reserve Act, which
Woodrow Wilson signed in 1913. Years later,
when the Jekyll trip was revealed to the public,
extremists seized on this stranger-than-fiction
episode to bolster their claim that the Fed was
a bankers’ plot against the American people.
For conspiracy theorists, the bankers’ conclave
on Jekyll became a metaphor for the Fed itself.
The obvious irony is that, fearing Americans’

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS, PRINTS & PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION, REPRODUCTION
NUMBER LC-USZ62-30740 (B&W FILM COPY NEG.)

A: The interest rate on reserves is the interest rate the Fed pays banks for holding reserves on deposit at the Fed. Lending reserves to another bank in the
federal funds market is an alternative to holding reserves at the Fed, and a
bank will typically do whichever pays more. As a result, these two interest
rates are usually close to each other.
Q: Does the federal funds rate matter only for banks?
A: Not at all. Only banks borrow directly in the federal funds market, but the
economic impact of this market is much broader. Because different parts of
the financial system are highly interconnected, interest rates on different
kinds of loans are strongly correlated with one another. So when the federal funds rate rises or falls, other interest rates typically move in the same
direction.
Q: What does the Fed have to do with the federal funds rate?
A: In recent years, the Fed has set a target for the federal funds rate. When the
Federal Open Market Committee meets about every six weeks, it decides
whether to raise or lower that target.

Senator Nelson Aldrich

irrational suspicion of central banking, Aldrich
and his crew resorted to a plot that, ultimately,
deepened the country’s paranoia.
Despite their clandestine tactics, the
financiers’ motives were actually patriotic.
Aldrich had visited Europe and studied its
central banks. He wanted expert help to draft
an American equivalent. And in between
sumptuous meals featuring wild turkey and
freshly scalloped oysters, his group of wealthy

bankers earnestly wrestled with issues that
still provoke us today: How should power
over the economy be apportioned between
Washington and localities? How should the
central bank set interest rates and the money
supply?
The Federal Reserve today is not perfect.
But it is more transparent than ever, thanks to
reforms instituted by the previous chairman,
Ben S. Bernanke, and it is no less necessary
than was a central bank in 1791. Americans’
paranoia is unjustified, just as it has always
been. ■

Questions to Discuss
1.

Why do you think Senator Aldrich wanted
to keep the meeting on Jekyll Island a
secret? In your view, was this secrecy
justified?

2.

Most people do not understand what the
Federal Reserve does. How do you suppose this lack of understanding affects
the job of central bankers?

Mr. Lowenstein is the author of America’s Bank:
The Epic Struggle to Create the Federal Reserve.

Source: Los Angeles Times, November 2, 2015.

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 633

13/09/22 6:34 PM

634

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

Q: How can the Fed make the federal funds rate hit the target it sets?
A: Although the actual federal funds rate is determined by supply and demand
in the market for loans among banks, the Fed can use the tools of monetary
policy to influence that market. Most directly, if the Fed raises the interest
rate it pays on reserves, banks will charge other banks more in the federal
funds markets. And if the Fed reduces the interest rate it pays on reserves,
banks will be more eager to lend in the federal funds market, driving down
the federal funds rate.
Q: But don’t these Fed actions affect the money supply?
A: Yes, absolutely. When the Fed announces a target for the federal funds
rate, it is committing itself to using its tools to hit that target, and these
policy actions affect the supply of money. Changes in the federal funds
target and changes in the money supply are two sides of the same
coin. Other things being equal, a decrease in the target for the federal
funds rate means an expansion in the money supply, and an increase
in the target for the federal funds rate means a contraction in the
money supply.

QuickQuiz
8. Which of the following actions by the Fed would tend
to increase the money supply?
a. an open-market sale of government bonds
b. a decrease in reserve requirements
c. an increase in the interest rate paid on reserves
d. an increase in the discount rate on Fed lending
9. If the Fed raises the interest rate it pays on reserves,
it will ________ the money supply by increasing
________.
a. decrease; the money multiplier
b. decrease; excess reserves
c. increase; the money multiplier
d. increase; excess reserves

10. In a system of fractional-reserve banking, even without any action by the central bank, the money supply declines if households choose to hold ________
currency or if banks choose to hold ________
reserves.
a. more; more
b. more; less
c. less; more
d. less; less

Answers are at the end of the chapter.

30-5 Conclusion
Some years ago, a book made the best-seller list with the title Secrets of the Temple:
How the Federal Reserve Runs the Country. Though no doubt an exaggeration, this title
highlighted the important role of the monetary system in our daily lives. Whenever
we buy or sell anything, we are relying on the extraordinarily useful social convention called “money.” Now that we know what money is and what determines its
supply, we can examine how changes in the quantity of money affect the economy.
The next chapter begins to address that topic.

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 634

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

635

Chapter in a Nutshell
• The term money refers to assets that people regularly
use to buy goods and services.
• Money serves three functions. As a medium of
exchange, it is the item used to make transactions. As
a unit of account, it provides a measure with which to
record prices and other economic values. As a store
of value, it offers a way to transfer purchasing power
from the present to the future.
• Commodity money, such as gold, is money that has
intrinsic value: It would be valued even if it were not
used as money. Fiat money, such as paper dollars, is
money without intrinsic value: It would be worthless
if it were not used as money.
• In the U.S. economy, money takes the form of currency
and various types of bank deposits, such as checking
accounts.
• The Federal Reserve, the central bank of the United
States, is responsible for overseeing the U.S. monetary
system. The Fed chair is appointed by the president
and confirmed by the Senate. The chair is the head
of the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets
monetary policy.
• When people deposit money in banks and banks use
a fraction of these deposits to make loans to the public, the quantity of money in the economy increases.
Because the banking system affects the money supply

in this way, the Fed’s control of the money supply is
imperfect.
• Bank owners provide the resources necessary to start a
bank, called bank capital. Because of leverage (the use
of borrowed funds for investment), a small change in
the value of a bank’s assets can lead to a large change
in the value of its capital. To protect depositors, regulators require banks to hold a certain minimum amount
of capital.
• The Fed has several tools it can use to influence the
money supply. It can expand the money supply by
buying bonds in open-market operations, reducing the
discount rate, increasing its lending to banks, lowering
reserve requirements, or decreasing the interest rate
on reserves. It can contract the money supply by selling bonds in open-market operations, increasing the
discount rate, reducing its lending to banks, raising
reserve requirements, or increasing the interest rate on
reserves. Historically, open-market operations were the
Fed’s primary tool, but since 2008, it has relied more on
the interest rate it pays on reserves.
• In recent years, the Fed has conducted monetary policy
by setting a target for the federal funds rate, a shortterm interest rate at which banks lend to one another.
As the Fed pursues its target, it adjusts the money
supply.

Key Concepts
money, p. 616
medium of exchange, p. 616
unit of account, p. 617
store of value, p. 617
liquidity, p. 617
commodity money, p. 617
fiat money, p. 617
currency, p. 619
demand deposits, p. 619

Federal Reserve (Fed), p. 620
central bank, p. 620
money supply, p. 621
monetary policy, p. 621
reserves, p. 622
fractional-reserve banking, p. 623
reserve ratio, p. 623
money multiplier, p. 625
bank capital, p. 625

leverage, p. 626
leverage ratio, p. 626
capital requirement, p. 627
open-market operations, p. 628
discount rate, p. 628
reserve requirements, p. 629
interest on reserves, p. 630
federal funds rate, p. 632

Questions for Review
1. What distinguishes money from other assets in the
economy?

3. What are demand deposits, and why should they be
included in the stock of money?

2. What is commodity money? What is fiat money?
Which kind do we use?

4. Who is responsible for setting monetary policy in the
United States? How is this group chosen?

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 635

13/09/22 6:34 PM

636

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

5. If the Fed wants to increase the money supply with
open-market operations, what does it do?

8. What is the discount rate? What happens to the
money supply when the Fed raises the discount rate?

6. Why don’t banks hold 100-percent reserves? How
is the amount of reserves banks hold related to the
amount of money that exists in the economy?

9. What are reserve requirements? What happens
to the money supply when the Fed raises reserve
requirements?

7. Bank A has a leverage ratio of 10, while Bank B has
a leverage ratio of 20. Similar losses on bank loans at
the two banks cause the value of their assets to fall by
7 percent. Which bank shows a larger change in bank
capital? Does either bank remain solvent? Explain.

10. Why can’t the Fed control the money supply
perfectly?

Problems and Applications
1. Which of the following are considered money in the
U.S. economy? Which are not? Explain your answers
by discussing each of the three functions of money.
a. a U.S. penny
b. a Mexican peso
c. a Picasso painting
d. a plastic credit card

5. You take $100 you had kept under your mattress
and deposit it in your bank account. If this $100
stays in the banking system as reserves and if banks
hold reserves equal to 10 percent of deposits, by
how much does the total amount of deposits in the
banking system increase? By how much does the
money supply increase?

2. Explain whether each of the following events
increases or decreases the money supply.
a. The Fed buys bonds in open-market operations.
b. The Fed reduces the reserve requirement.
c. The Fed increases the interest rate it pays on reserves.
d. Citibank repays a loan it had previously taken
from the Fed.
e. After a rash of pickpocketing, people decide to
hold less currency.
f. Fearful of bank runs, bankers decide to hold more
reserves.
g. The FOMC increases its target for the federal
funds rate.

6. Happy Bank starts with $200 in bank capital. It then
accepts $800 in deposits. It keeps 12.5 percent (1/8th)
of deposits in reserve. It uses the rest of its assets to
make bank loans.
a. Show the balance sheet of Happy Bank.
b. What is Happy Bank’s leverage ratio?
c. Suppose some borrowers from Happy Bank
default so the value of the bank loans declines by
10 percent. Show the bank’s new balance sheet.
d. By what percentage do the bank’s total
assets decline? By what percentage does the
bank’s capital decline? Which change is larger?
Why?

3. Your uncle repays a $100 loan from Tenth National
Bank (TNB) by writing a $100 check from his TNB
checking account. Use T-accounts to show the effect
of this transaction on your uncle and on TNB. Has
your uncle’s wealth changed? Explain.

7. In an open-market operation, the Fed buys $10
million of government bonds from individual
investors. If the required reserve ratio is 10
percent, what are the largest and smallest possible
increases in the money supply that could result?
Explain.

4. Beleaguered State Bank (BSB) holds $250 million in
deposits and maintains a reserve ratio of 10 percent.
a. Show a T-account for BSB.
b. Now suppose that Daddy Warbucks, BSB’s largest
depositor, withdraws $10 million in cash from
his account and that BSB decides to restore its
reserve ratio by reducing the amount of loans
outstanding. Show its new T-account.
c. Explain what effect BSB’s action will have on other
banks.
d. Why might it be difficult for BSB to take the action
described in part (b)? Discuss another way for BSB
to return to its original reserve ratio.

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 636

8. Assume that the reserve requirement is 5 percent.
All other things being equal, will the money
supply expand more if the Fed buys $2,000 worth
of bonds or if someone deposits in a bank $2,000
that had been hidden in a cookie jar? If one of
these actions creates more money than the other,
how much more does it create? Support your
thinking.

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter 30 The Monetary System

9. Suppose that the reserve requirement for checking
deposits is 10 percent and that banks do not hold any
excess reserves.
a. If the Fed sells $1 million of government bonds,
what is the effect on the economy’s reserves and
money supply?
b. Now suppose that the Fed lowers the reserve
requirement to 5 percent but that banks choose
to hold another 5 percent of deposits as excess
reserves. Why might banks do so? What is the
overall change in the money multiplier and the
money supply as a result of these actions?
10. Assume that the banking system has total reserves of
$100 billion. Assume also that required reserves are
10 percent of checking deposits, banks hold no excess
reserves, and households hold no currency.
a. What is the money multiplier? What is the money
supply?
b. If the Fed now raises required reserves to 20
percent of deposits, what are the change in
reserves and the change in the money supply?
11. Assume that the reserve requirement is 20 percent.
Also assume that banks do not hold excess reserves

637

and that the public does not hold any cash. The Fed
decides that it wants to expand the money supply by
$40 million.
a. If the Fed is using open-market operations, will it
buy or sell bonds?
b. What quantity of bonds does the Fed need to
buy or sell to accomplish the goal? Explain your
reasoning.
12. The economy of Elmendyn contains 2,000 $1 bills.
a. If people hold all money as currency, what is the
quantity of money?
b. If people hold all money as demand deposits and
banks maintain 100 percent reserves, what is the
quantity of money?
c. If people hold equal amounts of currency and
demand deposits and banks maintain 100 percent
reserves, what is the quantity of money?
d. If people hold all money as demand deposits and
banks maintain a reserve ratio of 10 percent, what
is the quantity of money?
e. If people hold equal amounts of currency and
demand deposits and banks maintain a reserve
ratio of 10 percent, what is the quantity of money?

QuickQuiz Answers
1. b

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 637

2. c

3. a

4. c

5. c

6. d

7. a

8. b

9. b

10. a

13/09/22 6:34 PM

22718_Ch30_ptg01.indd 638

13/09/22 6:34 PM

Chapter

31

ROMAN SAMBORSKYI/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM; ARNO VAN ENGELAND/EYEEM/GETTY IMAGES

Money Growth
and Inflation

oday, if you want to buy an ice-cream cone, you need at
least a couple of dollars. But that has not always been the
case. In the 1930s, my grandmother ran a sweet shop in
Trenton, New Jersey, where she sold ice-cream cones in two sizes.
A cone with a small scoop of ice cream cost 3 cents. Hungry customers could buy a large scoop for a nickel.
This increase in the price of ice cream, and of most things sold in
the 1930s, is typical of modern economies, where prices tend to rise
over time. Such an increase in the overall level of prices is called
inflation. An earlier chapter discussed how economists measure
the inflation rate as the percentage change in the consumer price
index (CPI), the GDP deflator, or some other index of the overall
price level. The CPI shows that in the United States from 1935 to
2021, prices rose, on average, 3.5 percent per year. Accumulated
over so many years, a 3.5 percent annual inflation rate amounts to
a nearly twenty-fold increase in the price level.
Inflation may seem natural to a person living in the United
States during recent decades, but in fact, it is not inevitable. There
were long periods in the 19th century during which most prices

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 639

13/09/22 6:47 PM

640

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

fell—a phenomenon called deflation. The average level of prices in the U.S. economy
was 23 percent lower in 1896 than in 1880, and this deflation was a major issue in the
presidential election of 1896. Farmers, who had accumulated large debts, suffered
when declines in crop prices reduced their incomes and their ability to pay off their
debts. They advocated government policies to reverse the deflation.
Although inflation has been the norm in more recent U.S. history, there has been
substantial variation in the rate at which prices rise. From 1970 to 1980, prices rose
by 7.8 percent per year, which meant that the price level more than doubled over
the decade. By contrast, from 2010 to 2020, inflation averaged only 1.7 percent per
year. But in early 2022, as the nation struggled to recover from the coronavirus
pandemic, the inflation rate rose above 7 percent to the highest rate in four decades,
and observers wondered whether this surge would be transitory or more persistent.
International data show a broad range of inflation experiences. In 2020, while the
inflation rate was 1.2 percent in the United States, it was zero in Japan, 3.4 percent in
Mexico, 11 percent in Nigeria, and 12 percent in Turkey. And even the high inflation rates in Nigeria and Turkey were moderate by some standards. In 2018,
inflation in Venezuela reached about 1 million percent per year, equivalent to an
increase in prices of about 2.5 percent per day. Such an extraordinarily high rate
of inflation is called hyperinflation.
What determines whether an economy experiences inflation and, if so, how
much? Many forces can affect the price level in the short run, as later chapters
will discuss. But to explain substantial or persistent inflation, economists most
often turn to the quantity theory of money, the main topic of this chapter. One
of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1 summarizes the basic insight:
Prices rise when the government prints too much money. The quantity theory can
explain moderate inflations, such as those experienced in the United States, as
well as hyperinflations.
This chapter also addresses a related question: Why is inflation a problem? At
first glance, the answer may seem obvious: It’s a problem because people don’t like
it. In the 1970s, when the United States experienced relatively high inflation, opinion polls placed inflation as the most important issue facing the nation. President
Ford echoed this sentiment in 1974 when he called inflation “public enemy number
one” and wore a “WIN” button on his lapel—for Whip Inflation Now. And in 2021,
when inflation surged in the late stages of the Covid-19 pandemic, President Biden
said it was “one of the most pressing economic concerns of the American people.”
But what, exactly, are the costs that inflation imposes on a society? The answer
may surprise you. Identifying the costs of inflation is not as straightforward as it
first appears. All economists decry hyperinflation, but some argue that the costs of
moderate inflation are not nearly as large as much of the public believes.

31-1 The Classical Theory of Inflation
The quantity theory of money is classical in the sense that it was developed by
some of the earliest economic thinkers. According to some historians, the theory
originated in the 16th century with the Renaissance polymath Nicolaus Copernicus,
who is most famous for his sun-centered model of the solar system. Proponents of
the quantity theory include many great economists: David Hume in the 18th century,
John Stuart Mill in the 19th century, and Irving Fisher and Milton Friedman in the
20th century. Today, most economists rely on the quantity theory to explain the
long-run determinants of the price level and inflation rate.

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 640

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

641

Suppose the price of an ice-cream cone rises from a nickel to a dollar over some
period. What conclusion should we draw from the willingness of people to give
up so much more money in exchange for a cone? It’s possible that they have come
to enjoy ice cream more (perhaps because someone has come up with a miraculous
new flavor). But it is more likely that people’s enjoyment of ice cream has stayed
roughly the same and that, over time, the money used to buy it has become less
valuable. In most cases, inflation is more about the value of money than about the
value of goods.
This insight points the way toward a theory of inflation. When the consumer
price index and other measures of the price level rise, it is tempting to look at the
individual prices that make up these price indexes. A typical news outlet might
report, “The CPI rose by 3 percent last month, led by a 20 percent increase in the
price of fresh fruits and vegetables and a 30 percent increase in the price of motor
fuel.” This approach contains some useful information about what’s happening,
but it misses a key point: Inflation is an economy-wide phenomenon that concerns,
first and foremost, the value of the economy’s medium of exchange.
The economy’s overall price level can be seen in two ways. So far, we have viewed
it as the price of a basket of goods and services. When the price level rises, people
must pay more for what they buy. Alternatively, we can view the price level as a
measure of money’s value. A rise in the price level means a lower value of money
because each dollar in your wallet or checking account buys fewer
goods and services.
It may help to express these ideas mathematically. Suppose P is the
price level as measured by the consumer price index or the GDP deflator. Then P measures the number of dollars needed to buy a basket of
goods and services. Now turn this idea around: The quantity of goods
and services that can be bought with $1 equals 1/P. In other words,
if P is the price of goods and services measured in terms of money,
1/P is the value of money measured in terms of goods and services.
This math is simplest to grasp for an economy with one good—say,
ice-cream cones. In that case, P is the price of a cone. When the price
of a cone (P) is $2, the value of a dollar (1/P) is half a cone. When
the price (P) rises to $3, the value of a dollar (1/P) falls to a third of a
cone. The actual economy produces thousands of goods and services,
so in practice, we use a price index rather than the price of a single “So what’s it going to be? The same
good. But the logic is the same: When the price level rises, the value size as last year or the same price as
last year?”
of money falls.

FRANK MODELL/ THE NEW YORKER COLLECTION
/WWW.CARTOONBANK.COM

31-1a The Level of Prices and the Value of Money

31-1b Money Supply, Money Demand,
and Monetary Equilibrium
What determines the value of money? The answer is supply and demand, as it is for
so many other questions in economics. Just as the supply and demand for bananas
determines the price of bananas, the supply and demand for money determines
the value of money. But what factors influence money supply and money demand?
First, consider money supply. The preceding chapter discussed how the Federal
Reserve, together with the banking system, influences the supply of money. To
do so, the Fed uses a variety of tools. It can increase the money supply by buying
government bonds in open-market operations or by reducing the interest rate it
pays banks for the reserves they hold. It can contract the money supply by selling
bonds or by increasing the interest rate on reserves. These policy actions affect the

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 641

13/09/22 6:47 PM

642

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

money supply by working through the system of fractional-reserve banking. For
the purposes of this chapter, however, these details about the banking system and
money creation can be put aside. We simplify matters by taking the quantity of
money supplied as a policy variable that the Fed controls.
Now consider money demand. Most fundamentally, the demand for money
reflects how much wealth people want to hold in liquid form. Many factors influence the quantity of money demanded. The amount of currency that people hold
in their wallets, for instance, depends on how much they rely on credit cards and
how easily they can find an automatic teller machine. And as we will emphasize
in Chapter 35, the quantity of money demanded depends on the interest rate that a
person could earn by using the money to buy an interest-bearing bond rather than
leaving it in his wallet or low-interest checking account.
Although many variables affect the demand for money, one is particularly important: the average level of prices in the economy. People hold money because it is the
medium of exchange. Unlike other assets, such as bonds or stocks, people can use
money to buy the goods and services on their shopping lists. How much money they
choose to hold for this purpose depends on the prices of those goods and services. The
higher the prices are, the more money the typical transaction requires, and the more
money people will choose to hold in their wallets and checking accounts. That is, a
higher price level (a lower value of money) increases the quantity of money demanded.
What ensures that the quantity of money the Fed supplies balances the quantity of
money people demand? The answer depends on the time horizon being considered.
Later in this book, we examine the short-run answer and learn that interest rates
play a key role. The long-run answer, however, is much simpler. In the long run,
money supply and money demand are brought into equilibrium by the overall
level of prices. If the price level is above the equilibrium level, people will want to
hold more money than the Fed has created, so the price level must fall to balance
supply and demand. If the price level is below the equilibrium level, people will
want to hold less money than the Fed has created, and the price level must rise to
balance supply and demand. At the equilibrium price level, the quantity of money
that people want to hold exactly balances the quantity of money supplied by the Fed.
Figure 1 illustrates these ideas. The horizontal axis of this graph shows the quantity of money. The left vertical axis shows the value of money 1/P, and the right
vertical axis shows the price level P. Notice that the price-level axis on the right
is inverted: A low price level is shown near the top of this axis, and a high price
level is shown near the bottom. This inverted axis illustrates that when the value
of money is high (as shown near the top of the left axis), the price level is low
(as shown near the top of the right axis).
The two curves in this figure are the supply and demand curves for money. The
supply curve is vertical because the Fed has fixed the quantity of money available.
The demand curve for money slopes downward, indicating that when the value
of money is low (and the price level is high), people demand a larger quantity of
money to buy goods and services. At the equilibrium, shown in the figure as point
A, the quantity of money demanded balances the quantity of money supplied. This
equilibrium of money supply and money demand determines the value of money
and the price level.

31-1c The Effects of a Monetary Injection
Consider the effects of a change in monetary policy. To do so, imagine that the
economy is in equilibrium and then, suddenly, the Fed doubles the supply of money
by printing dollar bills and dropping them around the country from helicopters.

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 642

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

Figure 1
How the Supply and Demand
for Money Determine the
Equilibrium Price Level

The horizontal axis shows the quantity of money. The left vertical axis shows the value
of money, and the right vertical axis shows the price level. The supply curve for money
is vertical because the quantity of money supplied is fixed by the Fed. The demand
curve for money slopes downward because people want to hold a larger quantity of
money when each dollar buys less. At the equilibrium, point A, the value of money
(on the left axis) and the price level (on the right axis) have adjusted to bring the
quantity of money supplied and the quantity of money demanded into balance.

Value of
Money, 1/P
(High)

Price
Level, P

Money supply

1

1

/

1.33

34

/

12

Equilibrium
value of
money

(Low)

A

Equilibrium
price level

/

14

0

(Low)

2

4
Money
demand
Quantity fixed
by the Fed

Quantity of
Money

(More realistically, the Fed alters the money supply using the tools discussed in the
previous chapter, but the helicopter metaphor is simpler and more vivid.) What
happens after such a monetary injection? How does the new equilibrium compare
with the old one?
Figure 2 shows what happens. The monetary injection shifts the supply curve
to the right from MS1 to MS2, and the equilibrium moves from point A to point B.
As a result, the value of money (shown on the left axis) decreases from ½ to ¼, and
the equilibrium price level (shown on the right axis) increases from 2 to 4. In other
words, when an increase in the money supply makes dollars more plentiful, the
result is an increase in the price level and a decrease in the value of each dollar.
This explanation of how the price level is determined and why it might change
over time is called the quantity theory of money. According to the quantity theory,
the quantity of money available in an economy determines the value of money, and
growth in the quantity of money is the primary cause of inflation. As the economist Milton Friedman once put it, “Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary
phenomenon.”

31-1d A Brief Look at the Adjustment Process
So far, we have compared the old and new equilibrium after an injection of money.
How does the economy move from one to the other? A complete answer requires
an understanding of short-run economic fluctuations, which we examine later in

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 643

643

(High)

quantity theory of
money
a theory asserting that
the quantity of money
available determines
the price level and
that the growth rate in
the quantity of money
available determines the
inflation rate

13/09/22 6:47 PM

644

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

Figure 2
An Increase in the Money
Supply

When the Fed increases the supply of money, the money supply curve shifts from
MS1 to MS2. The value of money (on the left axis) and the price level (on the right
axis) adjust to bring supply and demand back into balance. The equilibrium moves
from point A to point B. Thus, when an increase in the money supply makes dollars
more plentiful, the price level increases, making each dollar less valuable.
Value of
Money, 1/P
(High)

MS1

1

1
1. An increase
in the money
supply . . .

/

34

2. . . . decreases the
value of money . . .

/

12

0

2

B

/

(Low)

1.33

A

14

(Low)

Price
Level, P

MS2

3. . . . and
increases the
price level.

4
Money
demand

M1

M2

Quantity of
Money

(High)

this book. Here, let’s briefly consider the adjustment process that occurs after a
change in the money supply.
The immediate effect of a monetary injection is to create an excess supply of
money. Before the injection, the economy was in equilibrium (point A in Figure 2).
At the prevailing price level, people were holding exactly as much of the medium of
exchange as they wanted. But after the helicopters drop the new money and people
pick it up off the streets, their wallets are bulging with more dollars than they need
for their planned transactions. At the prevailing price level, the quantity of money
supplied now exceeds the quantity demanded.
People try to get rid of this excess supply of money in various ways. They might
use it to buy more goods and services. Or they might use this excess money to make
loans to others by buying bonds or by depositing the money in a bank savings
account. These loans allow other people to buy more goods and services. In either
case, the injection of money increases the demand for goods and services.
The economy’s ability to supply goods and services, however, has not changed.
As we saw in the chapter on production and growth, the economy’s output of
goods and services is determined by the available labor, physical capital, human
capital, natural resources, and technological knowledge. The injection of money
alters none of these.
That’s why the greater demand for goods and services causes the prices of goods
and services to rise. The increase in the price level, in turn, increases the quantity of
money demanded because people use more dollars for every transaction. Eventually,
the economy reaches a new equilibrium (point B in Figure 2) at which the quantity

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 644

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

645

of money demanded again equals the quantity of money supplied. In this way, the
overall price level adjusts to bring money supply and money demand back into
balance.

31-1e The Classical Dichotomy and Monetary Neutrality
We have seen how changes in the money supply lead to changes in the average level
of prices of goods and services. How do monetary changes affect other variables,
such as production, employment, wages, and interest rates? This question has long
intrigued economists.
Economic variables can be divided into two groups. The first group consists
of nominal variables—variables measured in monetary units. The second group
consists of real variables—variables measured in physical units. For example, the
income of corn farmers is a nominal variable because it is expressed in dollars,
while the quantity of corn they produce is a real variable because it is expressed
in bushels. Nominal GDP measures the dollar value of the economy’s output of
goods and services; real GDP measures the total quantity of goods and services and
is not influenced by the current prices of those goods and services. The separation
of real and nominal variables is called the classical dichotomy. A dichotomy is a
division into two groups, and classical refers to the early economic thinkers who
first proposed this division.
Applying the classical dichotomy is tricky for prices. Most prices are quoted in
units of money and, therefore, are nominal variables. When we say that the price
of corn is $2 a bushel or that the price of wheat is $1 a bushel, both prices are nominal variables. But what about a relative price—the price of one thing in terms of
another? In this example, we could say that the price of a bushel of corn is 2 bushels
of wheat, a relative price that is not measured in terms of money. When comparing
the prices of any two goods, the dollar signs cancel, and the resulting number is
expressed in physical units. Thus, while dollar prices are nominal variables, relative
prices are real variables.
This has many applications. For instance, the real wage (the dollar wage adjusted
for inflation) is a real variable because it measures the rate at which people exchange
a unit of labor for goods and services. Similarly, the real interest rate (the nominal
interest rate adjusted for inflation) is a real variable because it measures the rate
at which people exchange goods and services today for goods and services in the
future. One clue, of course, is the powerful word “real.” When it appears before a
variable, that variable has been adjusted for inflation and is, therefore, measured
in physical units.
Why separate variables into these groups? The classical dichotomy is useful
because different forces influence real and nominal variables. According to classical analysis, nominal variables are influenced by developments in the economy’s
monetary system, but real variables are not.
This idea was implicit in our discussion of the real economy in the long run.
Previous chapters examined the determinants of production, saving, investment, real
interest rates, and unemployment without mentioning the effects of money. In that
analysis, the economy’s output of goods and services depends on technology and
factor supplies, the real interest rate balances the supply and demand for loanable
funds, the real wage balances the supply and demand for labor, and unemployment
results when the real wage is above the equilibrium level. These conclusions have
nothing to do with the quantity of money supplied.
Changes in the supply of money, according to classical theory, affect nominal
variables but not real ones. When the central bank doubles the money supply, the

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 645

nominal variables
variables measured in
monetary units

real variables
variables measured in
physical units

classical dichotomy
the theoretical separation
of nominal variables and
real variables

13/09/22 6:47 PM

646

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

monetary neutrality
the proposition that
changes in the money
supply do not affect real
variables

price level doubles, the dollar wage doubles, and all other dollar values double.
Real variables, such as production, employment, real wages, and real interest rates,
are unchanged. The irrelevance of monetary changes to real variables is called
monetary neutrality.
An analogy helps explain monetary neutrality. As the unit of account, money is
the yardstick used to measure economic transactions. When a central bank doubles
the money supply, all prices double, and the value of the unit of account falls by half.
A similar change would occur if the government were to reduce the length of the
yard from 36 to 18 inches: With the new, shorter yardstick, all measured distances
(nominal variables) would double, but the actual distances (real variables) would
remain the same. The dollar, like the yard, is merely a unit of measurement, so a
change in its value should not have real effects.
Is monetary neutrality realistic? Not completely. A change in the length of the yard
from 36 to 18 inches might not matter in the long run, but in the short run, it would
lead to confusion and mistakes. Similarly, most economists today believe that over
short periods of time—within the span of a year or two—monetary changes affect
real variables. (The classical economists themselves, most notably David Hume,
also doubted that monetary neutrality would apply in the short run.) We will study
short-run non-neutrality later in the book, and this topic will help explain why the
Fed adjusts the money supply over time.
Yet classical analysis may be fundamentally right about the economy in the
long run. Over the course of a decade, monetary changes have significant effects
on nominal variables (such as the price level) but appear to have negligible effects
on real variables (such as real GDP). When studying long-run changes in the
economy, the neutrality of money offers a reasonably good description of how
the world works.

31-1f Velocity and the Quantity Equation
velocity of money
the rate at which money
changes hands

For another perspective on the quantity theory of money, consider the following
question: How many times per year is the typical dollar bill used to pay for a newly
produced good or service? The answer is given by a variable called the velocity of
money. In physics, the term velocity refers to the speed at which an object travels.
In economics, the velocity of money refers to the speed at which the typical dollar
travels around the economy from person to person.
The velocity of money is calculated by dividing the nominal value of output
(nominal GDP) by the quantity of money. If P is the price level (the GDP deflator), Y is the quantity of output (real GDP), and M is the quantity of money, then
velocity is
V 5 ( P 3 Y )/M.

To see why this makes sense, imagine a simple economy that produces only pizza.
Suppose that the economy produces 100 pizzas in a year, a pizza sells for $10, and
the quantity of money in the economy is $50. Then the velocity of money is
V 5 ($10 3 100)/$50
5 20.

In this economy, people spend a total of $1,000 per year on pizza. For this $1,000 of
spending to take place with only $50 of money, each dollar must change hands, on
average, 20 times per year.

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 646

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

647

With slight algebraic rearrangement, this equation can be rewritten as
M 3 V 5 P 3 Y.

This equation states that the quantity of money (M) times the velocity of money
(V) equals the price of output (P) times the amount of output (Y). It is called the
quantity equation because it relates the quantity of money (M) to the nominal
value of output (P 3 Y). The quantity equation shows that an increase in the
quantity of money in an economy must be reflected in one of the other three variables: The price level must rise, the quantity of output must rise, or the velocity
of money must fall.
In many cases, it turns out that the velocity of money is relatively stable, at least
compared with other economic variables. For example, Figure 3 shows nominal
GDP, the quantity of money (as measured by M2), and the velocity of money for the
U.S. economy since 1959. During this period, the money supply and nominal GDP
both increased more than fortyfold. By contrast, the velocity of money, although not
exactly constant, has not changed nearly as much. For some purposes, the assumption of constant velocity is a good approximation.

Figure 3
Nominal GDP, the Quantity of
Money, and the Velocity of
Money

quantity equation
the equation M 3 V 5
P 3 Y, which relates
the quantity of money,
the velocity of money,
and the dollar value of
the economy’s output of
goods and services

This figure shows the nominal value of output as measured by nominal GDP, the
quantity of money as measured by M2, and the velocity of money as measured by
their ratio. For comparability, all three series have been scaled to equal 100 in 1959.
Notice that nominal GDP and the quantity of money have grown substantially over
this period, while velocity has been relatively stable.
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce; Federal Reserve Board.

Indexes
(1959 = 100)

10,000

Nominal GDP
M2

1,000

Velocity

100

10

1959

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 647

1969

1979

1989

1999

2009

2019

13/09/22 6:47 PM

648

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

We now have all the elements necessary to explain the equilibrium price level
and inflation rate. They are as follows:
1. The velocity of money is relatively stable over time.
2. Because velocity is stable, when the central bank changes the quantity of
money (M), it causes proportionate changes in the nominal value of output
(P 3 Y).
3. The economy’s output of goods and services (Y) is determined by factor
supplies (labor, physical capital, human capital, and natural resources) and
the available production technology. In particular, since money is neutral,
money does not affect output.
4. Because output (Y) is fixed by factor supplies and technology, when the central bank alters the money supply (M) and induces a proportional change in
the nominal value of output (P 3 Y), this change is reflected in a change in
the price level (P).
5. Therefore, when the central bank increases the money supply rapidly, the
result is a high rate of inflation.
These five points are the essence of the quantity theory of money. In short, the
theory says that inflation results from “too much money chasing too few goods.”

Case
Study

Money and Prices during Four Hyperinflations

Earthquakes can wreak havoc on a society, but they provide much useful data for seismologists. These data can shed light on alternative theories and help society predict and deal with future threats. Similarly,
hyperinflations are terrible to live through (more on this later), but they offer
economists a natural experiment to study the effects of money on the economy.
Hyperinflations are interesting for a simple reason: The changes in the money
supply and price level are enormous. Hyperinflation is generally defined as inflation that exceeds 50 percent per month, which amounts to more than a hundredfold
increase in the price level over the course of a year. Returning to our ice-cream
example, this rate of inflation would mean that a $2 cone you bought in the summer
of 2023 would cost $260 in the summer of 2024.
Four classic hyperinflations occurred during the 1920s in Austria, Hungary,
Germany, and Poland in the aftermath of World War I. In Austria, for example,
the price level roughly doubled from July 1922 to August 1922 and then doubled
again the next month. “One cannot even talk about prices,” a visitor to Vienna said.
“Before one’s sentence has ended, they have increased again.”
The data on these hyperinflations show a clear link between the quantity of
money and the price level. Figure 4 shows the quantity of money in the economy
and an index of the price level for each of these economies. The slope of the money
line represents the rate at which the quantity of money was growing, and the slope
of the price line represents the inflation rate. The steeper the lines, the higher the
rates of money growth or inflation.
Notice that in each graph, the quantity of money and the price level are almost
parallel. In each instance, growth in the quantity of money is moderate at first, and
so is inflation. But over time, the quantity of money in the economy starts growing faster and faster. At about the same time, inflation also takes off. Then, when
the quantity of money stabilizes, the price level stabilizes as well. These episodes
illustrate one of the Ten Principles of Economics: Prices rise when the government
prints too much money. ●

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 648

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

649

This figure shows the quantity of money and the price level during four
hyperinflations. (Note that because these variables are graphed on logarithmic
scales, equal vertical distances on the graph represent equal percentage changes in
the variable.) In each case, the quantity of money and the price level move closely
together. The strong association between these two variables is consistent with the
quantity theory of money, which states that growth in the money supply is the primary
cause of inflation.

Figure 4
Money and Prices during Four
Hyperinflations

Source: Adapted from Thomas J. Sargent, “The End of Four Big Inflations,” in Robert Hall, ed., Inflation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983),
pp. 41–93. Each series is normalized to equal 100 for the initial observation.

(a) Austria

(b) Hungary

Index
(Jan. 1921 = 100)

Index
(July 1921 = 100)

100,000

100,000
Price level

Price level

10,000

10,000

Money supply

1,000
100

Money supply

1,000

1921

1922

1923

1924

1925

100

1921

1922

1924

1925

(d) Poland

(c) Germany
Index
(Jan. 1921 = 100)

Index
(Jan. 1921 = 100)
100,000,000,000,000
1,000,000,000,000
10,000,000,000
100,000,000
1,000,000
10,000
100
1

1923

10,000,000

Price level

Price level

1,000,000

Money
supply

Money
supply

100,000
10,000
1,000

1921

1922

1923

1924

1925

100

1921

1922

1923

1924

1925

31-1g The Inflation Tax
If inflation is so easy to explain, why do countries experience hyperinflation? That
is, why do the central banks of these countries print so much money that its value
is certain to fall rapidly?
The answer is that the governments of these countries are using money creation
to pay for their spending. When governments want to build roads or schools, pay
the salaries of public employees, or give transfer payments to the disadvantaged
or politically powerful, they first must raise the necessary funds. Normally, they do
this by levying taxes, such as income and sales taxes, and by borrowing from the
public by selling government bonds. Yet in an economy with a system of fiat money,
a government can also pay for spending simply by printing the money it needs.
When the government raises revenue by printing money, it is said to levy an inflation
tax. The inflation tax is not exactly like other taxes, however, because the government
doesn’t send anyone a bill for this tax. Instead, the inflation tax is subtler. When the

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 649

inflation tax
the revenue the
government raises by
creating money

13/09/22 6:47 PM

650

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

government prints money, the price level rises, and the dollars in your wallet become
less valuable. Thus, the inflation tax is like a tax on everyone who holds money.
The importance of the inflation tax varies from country to country and over time.
In the United States, in recent years, the inflation tax has been a minor source of
revenue: It has accounted for less than 3 percent of federal receipts. During the 1770s,
however, the Continental Congress of the fledgling United States relied heavily on
the inflation tax to pay for military spending. Because the new government had a
limited ability to raise funds through regular taxes or borrowing, printing dollars
was the easiest way to compensate the soldiers fighting for independence. As the
quantity theory predicts, the result was a high rate of inflation: Prices measured
in terms of the continental dollar rose more than a hundredfold over a few years.
Almost all hyperinflations follow the same pattern as the hyperinflation during
the American Revolution. The government has high spending, inadequate tax revenue, and limited capacity to borrow. To pay for its spending, it turns to the printing
press. The massive increases in the quantity of money then lead to massive inflation.
The hyperinflation ends when the government institutes fiscal reforms—such as
cuts in government spending—that eliminate the need for the inflation tax.

31-1h The Fisher Effect
According to the principle of monetary neutrality, an increase in the rate of money
growth raises the rate of inflation but does not affect any real variable. An important
application concerns the effect of money on interest rates. Macroeconomists are
especially concerned about interest rates because they link the economy of the present and the economy of the future through their effects on saving and investment.
To understand the relationship among money, inflation, and interest rates, recall
the distinction between the nominal interest rate and the real interest rate. The
nominal interest rate is the interest rate you hear about at your bank. If you have
a savings account, for instance, the nominal interest rate tells you how fast the
number of dollars in your account will rise over time. The real interest rate corrects
the nominal interest rate for the effect of inflation to tell you how fast the purchasing power of your savings account will rise over time. The real interest rate is the
nominal interest rate minus the inflation rate:
Real interest rate 5 Nominal interest rate 2 Inflation rate.

For example, if the bank posts a nominal interest rate of 7 percent per year and
the inflation rate is 3 percent per year, then the real value of the deposits grows by
4 percent per year.
We can rewrite this equation to show that the nominal interest rate is the sum of
the real interest rate and the inflation rate:
Nominal interest rate 5 Real interest rate 1 Inflation rate.

This way of looking at the nominal interest rate is useful because different forces
determine each of the two terms on the right side of this equation. As an earlier
chapter discussed, the supply and demand for loanable funds determine the real
interest rate. And according to the quantity theory of money, growth in the money
supply determines the inflation rate.
So how does growth in the money supply affect interest rates? In the long run, over
which money is neutral, a change in money growth should not affect the real interest rate. The real interest rate is, after all, a real variable. For the real interest rate to
remain unchanged, a change in the inflation rate must result in a one-for-one change

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 650

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

in the nominal interest rate. Thus, when a central bank increases the rate of money
growth, the long-run result is an equal increase in the inflation rate and the nominal
interest rate. This adjustment of the nominal interest rate to the inflation rate is called
the Fisher effect, after Irving Fisher (1867–1947), the economist who first studied it.
Keep in mind that this analysis of the Fisher effect has maintained a long-run
perspective. The Fisher effect need not hold in the short run because inflation may
be unanticipated. A nominal interest rate is a payment on a loan, and it is typically
set when the loan is first made. If a jump in inflation catches the borrower and lender
by surprise, the nominal interest rate they agreed on will fail to reflect the higher
inflation. But if inflation remains high, people will eventually come to expect it, and
the nominal interest rates set in loan agreements will reflect this expectation. To be
precise, therefore, the Fisher effect states that the nominal interest rate adjusts to
expected inflation. Expected inflation moves with actual inflation in the long run
but not necessarily in the short run.
The Fisher effect is crucial for understanding changes in the nominal interest
rate over time. Figure 5 shows the nominal interest rate and the inflation rate in
the U.S. economy since 1960. The close association between these two variables
is clear. The nominal interest rate rose from the early 1960s through the 1970s
because inflation was also rising during this time. Similarly, the nominal interest
rate fell from the early 1980s through the 1990s because the Fed got inflation under
control. In the 2010s, both the nominal interest rate and the inflation rate were low
by historical standards.

Figure 5
The Nominal Interest Rate and
the Inflation Rate

651

Fisher effect
the one-for-one
adjustment of the
nominal interest rate to
the inflation rate

This figure uses annual data since 1960 to show the nominal interest rate on threemonth Treasury bills and the inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index.
The close association between these two variables provides evidence for the Fisher
effect: When the inflation rate rises, so does the nominal interest rate.
Source: U.S. Department of Treasury; U.S. Department of Labor.

Percent
(per year)
15
12
Nominal interest rate
9
6
Inflation

3
0

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

–3

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 651

13/09/22 6:47 PM

652

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

QuickQuiz
1. The classical principle of monetary neutrality states
that changes in the money supply do not influence
________ variables, and it is thought to be most
applicable in the ________ run.
a. nominal; short
b. nominal; long
c. real; short
d. real; long
2. If nominal GDP is $400, real GDP is $200, and the
money supply is $100, then
a. the price level is ½, and velocity is 2.
b. the price level is ½, and velocity is 4.
c. the price level is 2, and velocity is 2.
d. the price level is 2, and velocity is 4.
3. According to the quantity theory of money, which
variable in the quantity equation is most stable over
long periods of time?
a. money
b. velocity
c. price level
d. output

4. Hyperinflation occurs when the government runs
a large budget ________, which the central bank
finances with a substantial monetary ________.
a. deficit; contraction
b. deficit; expansion
c. surplus; contraction
d. surplus; expansion
5. According to the quantity theory of money and the
Fisher effect, if the central bank increases the rate of
money growth, then
a. inflation and the nominal interest rate both
increase.
b. inflation and the real interest rate both increase.
c. the nominal interest rate and the real interest rate
both increase.
d. inflation, the real interest rate, and the nominal
interest rate all increase.

Answers are at the end of the chapter.

31-2 The Costs of Inflation
In the late 1970s, when the U.S. inflation rate reached about 10 percent
per year, inflation dominated debates over economic policy. And even when
inflation is low, it remains a closely watched macroeconomic variable. One
study found that inflation is the economic term mentioned most often in U.S.
newspapers (ahead of second-place finisher unemployment and third-place finisher
productivity).
Inflation is closely watched and widely discussed because it is thought to be a
serious economic problem. But is that true? And if so, why?

31-2a A Fall in Purchasing Power? The Inflation Fallacy
If you ask most people why inflation is bad, they will tell you that the answer is
obvious: Inflation robs them of the purchasing power of their hard-earned dollars.
When prices rise, each dollar of income buys fewer goods and services. So it might
seem that inflation directly lowers living standards.
Yet further thought reveals a fallacy in this answer. When prices rise, buyers of
goods and services pay more for what they buy. At the same time, however, sellers
of goods and services get more for what they sell. Because most people earn their
incomes by selling their services, such as their labor, inflation in incomes goes hand
in hand with inflation in prices. Inflation does not in itself reduce people’s real
purchasing power.

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 652

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

653

People believe the inflation fallacy because they do not appreciate the principle
of monetary neutrality. Workers who receive an annual raise of 10 percent tend
to view that raise as a reward for their talent and effort. When an inflation rate of
6 percent reduces the real value of that raise to only 4 percent, the workers might feel
cheated. In fact, as the chapter on production and growth discussed, real incomes
are determined by real variables, such as physical capital, human capital, natural
resources, and the available production technology. Nominal incomes are determined
by a combination of those factors and the overall price level. If the Fed lowered the
inflation rate from 6 percent to zero, the workers’ annual raise would fall from 10
percent to 4 percent. They might feel less robbed by inflation, but their real income
would not rise more quickly.
If nominal incomes tend to keep pace with rising prices in the long run, why then
is inflation a problem? It turns out that there is no single answer. Instead, economists have identified several costs of inflation. Each of these costs shows some way
in which persistent growth in the money supply does, in fact, have some adverse
effect on real variables.

31-2b Shoeleather Costs
As we have seen, inflation is like a tax on the holders of money. The tax itself is not
a cost to society: It is only a transfer of resources from households to the government. Yet most taxes give people an incentive to alter their behavior to avoid paying
the tax, and this distortion of incentives causes deadweight losses. This is true for
the inflation tax as well. It causes deadweight losses because people waste scarce
resources trying to escape it.
How can a person avoid paying the inflation tax? Because inflation erodes the real
value of money, you can avoid the inflation tax by holding less money. One way to
do this is to go to the bank more often. For example, rather than withdrawing $200
every four weeks, you might withdraw $50 once a week. By making more frequent
trips to the bank, you can keep more of your wealth in your interest-bearing savings
account and less in your wallet, where inflation erodes its value.
The cost of reducing your money holdings is called the shoeleather cost of
inflation because making more frequent trips to the bank causes your shoes to wear
out more quickly. Of course, this term is not to be taken literally: The actual cost of
reducing your money holdings is not the wear and tear on your shoes but the time
and convenience you must sacrifice to keep less money on hand than you would
if there were no inflation.
The shoeleather costs of inflation have been trivial in the U.S. economy, which
usually has only moderate inflation. But this cost is magnified in countries
with hyperinflation. Here is a description of one person’s experience in Bolivia
during its hyperinflation (as reported in the August 13, 1985, issue of The Wall
Street Journal):

shoeleather costs
the resources wasted
when inflation
encourages people to
reduce their money
holdings

When Edgar Miranda gets his monthly teacher’s pay of 25 million pesos, he
hasn’t a moment to lose. Every hour, pesos drop in value. So, while his wife
rushes to market to lay in a month’s supply of rice and noodles, he is off with
the rest of the pesos to change them into black-market dollars.
Mr. Miranda is practicing the First Rule of Survival amid the most out-of-control
inflation in the world today. Bolivia is a case study of how runaway inflation
undermines a society. Price increases are so huge that the figures build up

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 653

13/09/22 6:47 PM

654

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

almost beyond comprehension. In one six-month period, for example, prices
soared at an annual rate of 38,000 percent. By official count, however, last year’s
inflation reached 2,000 percent, and this year’s is expected to hit 8,000 percent—
though other estimates range many times higher. In any event, Bolivia’s rate
dwarfs Israel’s 370 percent and Argentina’s 1,100 percent—two other cases of
severe inflation.
It is easier to comprehend what happens to the thirty-eight-year-old Mr. Miranda’s
pay if he doesn’t quickly change it into dollars. The day he was paid 25 million
pesos, a dollar cost 500,000 pesos. So he received $50. Just days later, with the rate
at 900,000 pesos, he would have received $27.
As this story shows, the shoeleather costs of inflation can be large. With the high
inflation rate, Mr. Miranda does not have the luxury of holding the local money
as a store of value. Instead, he is forced to convert his pesos quickly into goods or
into U.S. dollars, which offer a more stable store of value. The time and effort that
Mr. Miranda expends to reduce his money holdings are wasted resources. If the
monetary authority pursued a low-inflation policy, Mr. Miranda would be happy
to hold pesos, and he could put his time and effort to more productive use. In fact,
shortly after this article was written, the inflation rate in Bolivia fell substantially
as a result of a more restrictive monetary policy.

31-2c Menu Costs

menu costs
the costs of changing
prices

Most firms do not change the prices of their products every day. Instead, firms
often announce prices and leave them unchanged for weeks, months, or even
years. One survey found that the typical U.S. firm changes its prices about once
a year.
Firms change prices infrequently because there are costs to changing prices. Costs
of price adjustment are called menu costs, a term derived from a restaurant’s cost
of printing a new menu. Menu costs include the costs of deciding on new prices,
printing new price lists and catalogs, sending these new price lists and catalogs to
dealers and customers, advertising the new prices, and even dealing with customer
annoyance over price changes.
Inflation increases the menu costs that firms must bear. In the low-inflation
environment that has usually prevailed in the modern U.S. economy, annual price
adjustment is an appropriate business strategy for many firms. But when high
inflation makes firms’ costs rise rapidly, annual price adjustment is impractical.
During hyperinflations, for example, firms must change their prices daily or even
more often just to keep up with all the other prices in the economy.

31-2d Relative-Price Variability and the Misallocation
of Resources
Suppose that the Eatabit Eatery prints a new menu with new prices every January
and then leaves its prices unchanged for the rest of the year. If there is no inflation,
Eatabit’s relative prices—the prices of its meals compared with other prices in the
economy—would be constant over the course of the year. But if the inflation rate
is 12 percent per year, Eatabit’s relative prices will automatically fall by 1 percent
each month. The restaurant’s relative prices will be highest in the early months of
the year, just after it has printed a new menu, and lowest in the later months. And
the higher the inflation rate, the greater this swing in relative prices will be. Thus,
because prices change only once in a while, inflation causes relative prices to vary
more than they otherwise would.

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 654

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

655

Why does this matter? The reason is that market economies rely on relative
prices to allocate scarce resources. Consumers decide what to buy by comparing
the quality and prices of various goods and services. Through these decisions, they
determine how the scarce factors of production are allocated among industries and
firms. When inflation distorts relative prices, consumer decisions are distorted, and
markets are less able to allocate resources to their best use.

31-2e Inflation-Induced Tax Distortions
Most taxes distort incentives, cause people to alter their behavior, and lead to a less
efficient allocation of the economy’s resources. In the presence of inflation, many taxes
become even more problematic. The reason is that lawmakers often fail to take inflation
into account when writing the tax laws. Economists who have studied the tax code
conclude that inflation tends to raise the tax burden on income earned from savings.
One example of how inflation discourages saving is the tax treatment of capital
gains—the profits made by selling an asset for more than its purchase price. Suppose
that, in 1975, you used some of your savings to buy one share of IBM stock for $10
and that you sold it for $110 in 2020. According to the tax law, you have earned
a capital gain of $100, which you must include in your income when figuring
out how much income tax you owe. But because the overall price level increased
fivefold from 1975 to 2020, the $10 you invested in 1975 is equivalent (in terms of
purchasing power) to $50 in 2020. So when you sell your stock for $110, you have a
real gain (an increase in purchasing power) of only $60 ($110 − $50). The tax code,
however, ignores inflation and taxes you on a gain of $100. In this way, inflation
exaggerates the size of capital gains and inadvertently increases the tax burden on
this type of income.
Another example is the tax treatment of interest income. The income tax treats
the nominal interest earned on savings as income, even though part of the nominal interest rate merely compensates for inflation. To see the effects, consider the
numerical example in Table 1. The table compares two economies, both of which
tax interest income at a rate of 25 percent. In Economy A, inflation is zero, and

Table 1
Economy A
(zero inflation)

How Inflation Raises the Tax
Burden on Saving
In the presence of zero inflation, a
25 percent tax on interest income
reduces the real interest rate from
4 percent to 3 percent. In the
presence of 8 percent inflation, the
same tax reduces the real interest
rate from 4 percent to 1 percent.

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 655

Economy B
(high inflation)

Real interest rate

4%

4%

Inflation rate

0

8

Nominal interest rate
(real interest rate 1 inflation rate)

4

12

Reduced interest due to 25 percent tax
(0.25 3 nominal interest rate)

1

3

After-tax nominal interest rate
(0.75 3 nominal interest rate)

3

9

After-tax real interest rate
(after-tax nominal interest rate
2 inflation rate)

3

1

13/09/22 6:47 PM

656

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

the nominal and real interest rates are both 4 percent. In this case, the 25 percent
tax on interest income reduces the real interest rate from 4 percent to 3 percent. In
Economy B, the real interest rate is again 4 percent, but the inflation rate is 8 percent.
As a result of the Fisher effect, the nominal interest rate is 12 percent. Because
the income tax treats this entire 12 percent interest as income, the 25 percent tax
leaves an after-tax nominal interest rate of only 9 percent and, after correcting for
8 percent inflation, an after-tax real interest rate of only 1 percent. In this case, the
25 percent tax on interest income reduces the real interest rate from 4 percent to
1 percent. Because the after-tax real interest rate provides the incentive to save,
saving is much less attractive in the economy with inflation (Economy B) than in
the economy with stable prices (Economy A).
The taxes on nominal capital gains and on nominal interest income are two
examples of how the tax code interacts with inflation. There are many others.
Because of these inflation-induced tax changes, higher inflation tends to discourage people from saving. Recall that the economy’s saving provides the resources
for investment, which, in turn, is important to long-run economic growth. When
inflation raises the tax burden on saving, it tends to depress the economy’s longrun growth rate. There is, however, no consensus among economists about the
size of this effect.
One solution to this problem, other than eliminating inflation, is to index the tax
system. That is, the tax laws could be revised to account for the effects of inflation.
In the case of capital gains, for example, the tax code could adjust the purchase
price using a price index and assess the tax only on the real gain. In the case of
interest income, the government could tax only real interest income by excluding
that portion of the interest income that merely compensates for inflation. To some
extent, the tax laws have moved in the direction of indexation. For example, the
income levels at which income tax rates change are adjusted automatically each
year based on changes in the consumer price index. Yet many other aspects of
the tax laws—such as the tax treatment of capital gains and interest income—are
not indexed.
In an ideal world, the tax laws would be written so that inflation would not alter
anyone’s real tax liability. In the real world, however, tax laws are far from perfect.
More complete indexation would probably be desirable, but it would further complicate a tax code that many people already consider onerous.

31-2f Confusion and Inconvenience
Imagine that we took a poll and asked the following question: “This year, a yard is
36 inches. How long do you think it should be next year?” If we could get people
to take us seriously, they would tell us that a yard should stay the same length—
36 inches. Anything else would just complicate life needlessly.
What does this have to do with inflation? Recall that money, as the economy’s
unit of account, is what we use to quote prices and record debts. Money is the
yardstick with which we measure economic transactions. The Federal Reserve is
a bit like the Bureau of Standards: Its job is to ensure the reliability of a commonly
used unit of measurement. When the Fed creates inflation, it erodes the real value
of the unit of account.
It is difficult to judge the costs of the confusion and inconvenience that arise from
inflation. As noted earlier, the tax code incorrectly measures real incomes in the presence of inflation. Similarly, accountants have difficulty measuring firms’ earnings
when prices are rising over time. Because inflation causes dollars at different times

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 656

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

657

to have different real values, computing a firm’s profit—the difference between
its revenue and costs—is more complicated in an economy with rapid inflation.
Therefore, to some extent, inflation can make it harder to sort successful from unsuccessful firms, impeding the financial system as it aims to allocate the economy’s
capital to its best uses.

31-2g A Special Cost of Unexpected Inflation: Arbitrary
Redistributions of Wealth
The costs of inflation discussed so far occur even if the change in the price level
is steady and predictable. Inflation has another cost, however, when it comes as a
surprise. Unexpected inflation redistributes wealth in a way that has nothing to do
with either merit or need. These redistributions occur because many loans in the
economy are specified in terms of the unit of account—money.
Consider an example. Suppose that Sophie Student takes out a $50,000 loan
at a 7 percent interest rate from Bigbank to attend college. In 10 years, the loan
will come due. After her debt has compounded for 10 years at 7 percent, Sophie
will owe Bigbank $100,000. But the real value of this debt will depend on inflation over the decade. If Sophie is lucky, the economy will have a hyperinflation.
In this case, wages and prices will rise so high that Sophie will be able to pay
the $100,000 debt out of pocket change. (The hyperinflation may, however, hurt
Sophie in other ways.) By contrast, if the economy goes through a major deflation,
then wages and prices will fall, and Sophie will find the $100,000 debt a greater
burden than anticipated.
This example shows that unexpected changes in prices redistribute wealth
among debtors and creditors. High inflation enriches Sophie at the expense
of Bigbank because it diminishes the real value of the debt; Sophie can repay
the loan in dollars that are less valuable than she expected. Deflation enriches
Bigbank at Sophie’s expense because it increases the real value of the debt; in
this case, Sophie must repay the loan in dollars that are more valuable. If inflation were predictable, then Bigbank and Sophie could take inflation into account
when setting the nominal interest rate on the loan. (Recall the Fisher effect.) But
if inflation is hard to predict, it imposes risk on Sophie and Bigbank that both
would prefer to avoid.
This cost of unexpected inflation is important to consider together with another tendency: Inflation is especially volatile and uncertain when the average rate
of inflation is high. This is evident in comparisons among different countries.
Countries with low average inflation, such as Germany in the late 20th century,
tend to have stable inflation. Countries with high average inflation, such as many
countries in Latin America, tend to have unstable inflation. There are no known
examples of economies with high, stable inflation. This relationship between the
level and volatility of inflation points to another cost of inflation. If a country
pursues a high-inflation monetary policy, it will have to bear not only the costs of
high expected inflation but also the arbitrary redistributions of wealth associated
with unexpected inflation.

31-2h Inflation Is Bad, but Deflation May Be Worse
In recent U.S. history, inflation has been the norm. But the level of prices has fallen at
times, such as during the late 19th century and early 1930s. From 1998 to 2012, Japan
experienced a 4-percent decline in its overall price level. So as we conclude our discussion of the costs of inflation, the costs of deflation are worth considering as well.

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 657

13/09/22 6:47 PM

658

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

Some economists have suggested that a small and predictable amount of deflation may be desirable. Milton Friedman pointed out that deflation would lower the
nominal interest rate (via the Fisher effect) and that a lower nominal interest rate
would reduce the cost of holding money. The shoeleather costs of holding money
would, he argued, be minimized by a nominal interest rate close to zero, which in
turn would require deflation equal to the real interest rate. This prescription for
moderate deflation is called the Friedman rule.
Yet there are also costs of deflation. Some of these mirror the costs of inflation. For
example, just as a rising price level induces menu costs and relative-price variability,
so does a falling price level. Moreover, in practice, deflation is rarely as steady and
predictable as Friedman recommended. More often, it comes as a surprise, resulting
in the redistribution of wealth toward creditors and away from debtors. Because
debtors tend to be poorer, these redistributions in wealth are especially painful.
Perhaps most important, deflation often arises from broader macroeconomic
difficulties. As we will see in future chapters, falling prices result when some event,
such as a monetary contraction, reduces the overall demand for goods and services.
This fall in aggregate demand can lead to falling incomes and rising unemployment. In other words, deflation is often a symptom of deeper economic problems.

Case
Study

The Wizard of Oz and the Free-Silver Debate

The movie The Wizard of Oz, based on a children’s book written in
1900, has been a staple of television and video streaming for decades.
The movie and book tell the familiar story of a young girl, Dorothy,
who finds herself lost in a strange land far from home. You may not know, though,
that some scholars believe that the story is an allegory about U.S. monetary policy
in the late 19th century, a period of severe deflation.
From 1880 to 1896, the price level in the U.S. economy fell by 23 percent. Because
this event was unanticipated, it led to an acute redistribution of wealth. Most farmers in the west were debtors. Their creditors were the bankers in the east. When
the price level fell, the real value of these debts rose, enriching the bankers at the
expense of the farmers.
According to Populist politicians of the time, the solution to the farmers’ problem was the free coinage of silver. During this period, the United States was operating with a gold standard. The quantity of gold determined the money supply
and the price level. Free-silver advocates wanted silver, in addition to gold, to be
used as money. This would have increased the money supply sharply, pushing up
the price level and reducing the burden of farmers’ debts.
The debate over silver was heated, and it was central to the politics of the 1890s.
A Populist election slogan was “We Are Mortgaged. All but Our Votes.” One
prominent advocate of free silver was William Jennings Bryan, the Democratic
nominee for president in 1896. He is remembered in part for a spellbinding speech
at the Democratic Party’s nominating convention in which he said, “You shall
not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns. You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.” Rarely since then have politicians waxed so
poetic about alternative approaches to monetary policy. Nonetheless, Bryan lost
the election to Republican William McKinley, and the United States remained on
the gold standard.
L. Frank Baum, author of the book The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, was a Midwestern
journalist. When he sat down to write a story that was ostensibly for children, he

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 658

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

659

made the characters represent protagonists in the major political battle of his time.
Here is how the economic historian Hugh Rockoff, writing in the Journal of Political
Economy in 1990, interprets the story:

Scarecrow:
Tin Woodsman:
Cowardly Lion:
Munchkins:
Wicked Witch of the East:
Wicked Witch of the West:
Wizard:
Oz:
Yellow Brick Road:

Traditional American values
Prohibitionist party, also called the
Teetotalers
Farmers
Industrial workers
William Jennings Bryan
Citizens of the East
Grover Cleveland
William McKinley
Marcus Alonzo Hanna, chairman of
the Republican Party
Abbreviation for ounce of gold
Gold standard

At the end of Baum’s story, Dorothy finds her way home, but it is not by
just following the yellow brick road. After a long and perilous journey, she
learns that the wizard is incapable of helping her. Instead, Dorothy discovers
the magical power of her silver slippers. (When the book became a movie in
1939, Dorothy’s slippers were changed from silver to ruby. The Hollywood
filmmakers were more interested in showing off the new technology of
Technicolor than in telling a story about 19th-century monetary policy.)
The Populists didn’t achieve the free coinage of silver, but they eventually
got the monetary expansion and inflation they wanted. In 1898, prospectors
discovered gold near the Klondike River in the Canadian Yukon. Increased
gold supplies also arrived from the mines of South Africa. As a result, the
money supply and the price level started to rise in the United States and in
other countries operating on the gold standard. Within 15 years, prices in the
United States returned to the levels that had prevailed in the 1880s, and farmers were better able to handle their debts. ●

AF ARCHIVE/ALAMY STOCK PHOTO

Dorothy:
Toto:

An early debate over monetary
policy

QuickQuiz
6. Ongoing inflation does not automatically reduce most
people’s incomes because
a. the tax code is fully indexed for inflation.
b. people respond to inflation by holding less money.
c. wage inflation goes together with price inflation.
d. higher inflation lowers real interest rates.
7. If an economy always has inflation of 10 percent per
year, which of the following costs of inflation will it
NOT suffer?
a. shoeleather costs from reduced holdings of money
b. menu costs from more frequent price adjustment

c. distortions from the taxation of nominal capital gains
d. arbitrary redistributions between debtors and
creditors
8. Because most loans are written in ________ terms,
an unexpected increase in inflation hurts ________.
a. real; creditors
b. real; debtors
c. nominal; creditors
d. nominal; debtors

Answers are at the end of the chapter.

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 659

13/09/22 6:47 PM

660

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

In the
News

Life during Hyperinflation

The costs of inflation are most apparent
when inflation becomes extreme.

What 52,000 Percent Inflation
Can Do to a Country
By Brook Larmer

I

walked into the empty restaurant in Managua
carrying a backpack stuffed with cash, thick
stacks of Nicaraguan córdobas bound by rubber bands. The waiter, as expected, asked me
to hand over the entire stash. It may have
looked like an illicit transaction. But this was
Nicaragua, in 1990, at the end of its war with
the American-trained contra rebels, and I was
only trying to buy a meal before my money lost
its value. A decade of guerrilla war and deficit spending had whipped up a maelstrom of
hyperinflation and shortages. Only two items
on the menu were available, and prices had
doubled in a matter of weeks. With inflation
surging past 13,000 percent annually, the restaurant now demanded payment upfront—to
ensure that the staff had enough time to tally
it. As I ate my rice and beans, two waiters
at another table counted every bill. I finished
before they did, even though the meal—and
all those millions of córdobas—added up to
less than $10.

Hyperinflation is a mercurial phenomenon, a
rupture that occurs when a government persistently spends (or prints) money that it doesn’t
have, and the public loses confidence in the
process. The distortions that emerge—like the
backpack full of soon-to-be-worthless cash—
can seem absurd, even laughable. Yet there
is nothing amusing about the damage that
hyperinflation can inflict on the lives of people
and nations. “If you can’t trust the money the
government issues, then you can’t trust anything,” says Steve Hanke, a professor of applied
economics at Johns Hopkins University and a
leading expert on hyperinflation (which he has
defined as 50 percent monthly inflation sustained for at least 30 days). Hanke has studied
the 58 cases of hyperinflation that have been
recorded, from Germany’s Weimar Republic to
the episode I witnessed in Nicaragua, each one
an earthquake that caused people to lose faith
in the very foundation—the value of money—
on which their lives depended.
The newest addition to the ignominious list,
and a cause for alarm in Washington, is the
crisis in Venezuela. Even with the world’s mostabundant oil fields, Venezuela has mismanaged
its way to economic disaster. Hyperinflation and
its common companion, chronic shortages of
food and medicine, have impoverished almost
all of the country’s 31 million people. Nine out
of 10 Venezuelans do not earn enough money to

buy sufficient food, according to a recent survey.
Over all, Venezuelans have lost an average of
24 pounds each. Malaria is on the rise, as is
crime. Those who can are getting out: More than
2.3 million Venezuelans have fled the country,
including more than half of the nation’s doctors.
The situation is still out of control.
Venezuela’s economy shrank by 35 percent
between 2013 and 2017, and economists
forecast another 18 percent drop in 2018. Oil
production, crippled by the lack of maintenance
and investment, fell in July to its lowest point in
nearly seven decades. According to Hanke, the
rate of inflation over the last 12 months was
52,000 percent. The chaos poses a risk for the
entire region. “Venezuela has sparked the most
serious economic, humanitarian and political
crisis in the Americas in decades,” says the
Brazilian economist Monica de Bolle, the director
of Latin American studies at the Johns Hopkins
University School for Advanced International
Studies. “There has never been a crisis quite
like this in the region, and we’ve had plenty.”
Nearly a century ago, Vladimir Lenin was
quoted in The New York Times saying that hyperinflation was “the simplest way to exterminate
the very spirit of capitalism.” If a country were
flooded with high face-value notes untethered
to anything of real value, he reasoned, “men
will cease to covet and hoard [money] so soon
as they discover it will not buy anything, and

31-3 Conclusion
This chapter discussed the causes and costs of inflation. The primary cause of substantial or persistent inflation is growth in the quantity of money. When the central
bank creates money in large quantities, the value of money falls quickly. To maintain
stable prices, the central bank must limit growth in the money supply.
The costs of inflation are more subtle. They include shoeleather costs, menu
costs, increased variability of relative prices, unintended changes in tax liabilities,
confusion and inconvenience, and arbitrary redistributions of wealth. Are these
costs, in total, large or small? All economists agree that they become huge during

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 660

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

the great illusion of the value and power of
money, on which the capitalist state is based,
will have been definitely destroyed.”
Lenin’s dark musings seemed almost prophetic in the jittery aftermath of World War
I. Weimar Germany had gambled, badly, in
financing its losing war effort with borrowed
funds. Buried in debt and forced, in 1921,
to pay reparations to the victorious Allies,
Germany printed bank notes and ignited the
most infamous bout of hyperinflation. By late
1923, prices were doubling roughly every
three and a half days, and at one point a single
American dollar was worth 6.7 trillion German
marks. An even more severe hyperinflation followed the end of World War II, when Hungary
printed notes of ever-higher value to finance its
recovery. The fastest-ever recorded hyperinflation resulted: At its peak in July 1946, prices
doubled every 15 hours.
War has often played a catalytic role in
hyperinflation, but it rarely acts alone. In the
early 1990s, the phenomenon stalked countries in Eastern Europe (Yugoslavia, BosniaHerzegovina, Armenia) that were confronting
wars and the fall of the Soviet Union. A decade
later in Zimbabwe, despite a long slide in
agricultural output, Robert Mugabe’s regime
printed money to pay the bloated bureaucracy
and to line its own pockets. By the time Mugabe
declared inflation illegal in 2007, people had
lost belief in their currency. Within a year, inflation shot up to 79.6 billion percent, so high

that even the government’s $100 trillion bills
became useless souvenirs soon after they were
printed.
Hyperinflation is not, as some might
assume, just inflation gone bad. It’s a different beast altogether, driven by politics and
psychology as much as economics. A government’s decision to continue spending (or printing money) far beyond its means is political,
whether done to finance war, win an election
or assuage its populace. Such monetary incontinence, unchecked, leads to a spiral of food
shortages, price hikes and currency devaluations. Those hit hardest are not the rich (whose
wealth is in property, stocks and commodities)
but the middle class, which depends on localcurrency salaries, savings and pensions whose
value is siphoned off by hyperinflation.
No conflict or natural calamity can be
blamed for Venezuela’s descent into chaos.
Its leaders did this on their own. With proven
oil reserves of 300 billion barrels—surpassing
even Saudi Arabia’s—Venezuela should be rich.
But the country’s early oil boom, led largely by
foreign companies, yielded only spotty development. When Hugo Chávez won the presidency in
1998, he vowed to give power and wealth to the
people. Buoyed by a sustained rise in oil prices,
he nationalized companies and funneled oil revenues into welfare programs and food imports.
Poverty and unemployment rates fell by half.
When oil prices cratered in 2008, Chávez kept
spending as if nothing had changed. Since his

661

death in 2013, his successor, Nicolás Maduro,
has doubled down on Chávez’s policies, even as
he has violently repressed the opposition. . . .
A new era isn’t likely to begin as long as
Maduro remains in power. He has shown no
interest in taking steps that might restore
economic balance, like cutting spending and
tying the bolívar to a solid foreign currency.
Washington murmurs about regime change.
But the biggest threat to Maduro now may be a
series of civil cases in American courts against
Citgo. The Venezuela-owned company is the
regime’s biggest generator of hard currency,
the only asset creditors can go after. If these
cases succeed in claiming damages for being
nationalized by the Chávez regime, Maduro’s
main lifeline could be cut off. “If the money
disappears,” de Bolle says, “so does his support, and the regime crumbles.” Only then, it
seems, will Venezuelans be able to escape a
nightmare in which they can’t trust the money
in their hands. ■

Questions to Discuss
1.

The article mentions that Venezuela’s
hyperinflation coincided with a shrinking economy. How does declining output
contribute to hyperinflation? How does
hyperinflation contribute to declining
output?

2.

Why do you think politicians pursue policies that lead to hyperinflation?

Source: New York Times, November 4, 2018.

hyperinflation. But during periods of moderate inflation—when prices rise by less
than 10 percent per year—the size of these costs is more open to debate.
This chapter presented many of the most important lessons about inflation, but
the analysis is incomplete. When the central bank reduces the rate of money growth,
prices rise less rapidly, as the quantity theory suggests. Yet as the economy makes
the transition to the lower inflation rate, the change in monetary policy will likely
disrupt production and employment. That is, even though monetary policy is neutral in the long run, it has profound effects on real variables in the short run. Later
in this book, we will examine the reasons for short-run monetary non-neutrality to
enhance our understanding of the causes and effects of inflation.

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 661

13/09/22 6:47 PM

662

Part X Money and Prices in the Long Run

Chapter in a Nutshell
• The overall level of prices in an economy adjusts to
bring money supply and money demand into balance.
When the central bank increases the supply of money,
it causes the price level to rise. Persistent growth in the
quantity of money leads to continuing inflation.
• The principle of monetary neutrality asserts that changes in the quantity of money influence nominal variables but not real variables. Most economists believe
that monetary neutrality approximately describes the
behavior of the economy in the long run.
• A government can pay for some of its spending simply
by printing money. When countries rely heavily on this
“inflation tax,” the result is hyperinflation.
• One application of the principle of monetary neutrality
is the Fisher effect: When the expected inflation rate

increases, the nominal interest rate increases by the
same amount so the real interest rate remains the same.
• Many people think that inflation makes them poorer
by raising the cost of what they buy. This view is a
fallacy because inflation also raises nominal incomes.
• Economists have identified six costs of inflation: shoeleather costs associated with reduced money holdings,
menu costs associated with more frequent adjustment
of prices, increased variability of relative prices, unintended changes in tax liabilities because of nonindexation of the tax code, confusion and inconvenience
resulting from a changing unit of account, and arbitrary
redistributions of wealth between debtors and creditors.
Many of these costs are large during hyperinflation, but
the size of these costs for moderate inflation is less clear.

Key Concepts
quantity theory of money, p. 643
nominal variables, p. 645
real variables, p. 645
classical dichotomy, p. 645

monetary neutrality, p. 646
velocity of money, p. 646
quantity equation, p. 647
inflation tax, p. 649

Fisher effect, p. 651
shoeleather costs, p. 653
menu costs, p. 654

Questions for Review
1. Explain how an increase in the price level affects the
real value of money.

4. In what sense is inflation like a tax? How does thinking
about inflation as a tax help explain hyperinflation?

2. According to the quantity theory of money, what is
the effect of an increase in the quantity of money?

5. According to the Fisher effect, how does an increase
in the inflation rate affect the real interest rate and the
nominal interest rate?

3. Explain the difference between nominal variables
and real variables and give two examples of each.
According to the principle of monetary neutrality,
which variables are affected by changes in the
quantity of money?

6. What are the costs of inflation? Which of these costs do
you think are most important for the U.S. economy?
7. If inflation is less than expected, who benefits—
debtors or creditors? Explain.

Problems and Applications
1. Suppose that this year’s money supply is $500 billion,
nominal GDP is $10 trillion, and real GDP is $5
trillion.
a. What is the price level? What is the velocity of
money?
b. Suppose that velocity is constant, and the
economy’s output of goods and services rises by

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 662

5 percent each year. What will happen to nominal
GDP and the price level next year if the Fed keeps
the money supply constant?
c. What money supply should the Fed set next year
if it wants to keep the price level stable?
d. What money supply should the Fed set next year
if it wants inflation of 10 percent?

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter 31 Money Growth and Inflation

663

6. Assuming a tax rate of 40 percent, compute the
before-tax real interest rate and the after-tax real
interest rate for each of the following cases.
a. The nominal interest rate is 10 percent, and the
inflation rate is 5 percent.
b. The nominal interest rate is 6 percent, and the
inflation rate is 2 percent.
c. The nominal interest rate is 4 percent, and the
inflation rate is 1 percent.

2. Suppose that changes in bank regulations expand the
availability of credit cards so that people can hold
less cash.
a. How does this event affect the demand for money?
b. If the Fed does not respond to this event, what will
happen to the price level?
c. If the Fed wants to keep the price level stable,
what should it do?
3. It is sometimes suggested that the Fed should try to
achieve zero inflation. If we assume that velocity is
constant, does this zero-inflation goal require that the
rate of money growth equal zero? If yes, explain why. If
no, explain what the rate of money growth should equal.

7. Recall that money serves three functions in the
economy. What are those functions? How does
inflation affect the ability of money to serve each of
these functions?
8. Suppose that people expect inflation to be 3 percent
but that, in fact, prices rise by 5 percent. Describe
how this unexpectedly high inflation would help or
hurt the following:
a. the government
b. a homeowner with a fixed-rate mortgage
c. a union worker in the second year of a labor
contract
d. a college that has invested some of its endowment
in government bonds

4. Suppose that a country’s inflation rate increases
sharply. What happens to the inflation tax on the
holders of money? Why is wealth held in savings
accounts not subject to a change in the inflation
tax? Can you think of any way in which holders of
savings accounts are hurt by the increase in inflation?
5. Consider the effects of inflation in an economy
composed of only two people: Bob, a bean farmer,
and Rita, a rice farmer. Bob and Rita both always
consume equal amounts of rice and beans. In 2022,
the price of beans was $1, and the price of rice was $3.
a. Suppose that in 2023, the price of beans was $2,
and the price of rice was $6. What was inflation?
Did the price changes leave Bob better off, worse
off, or unaffected? What about Rita?
b. Now suppose that in 2023, the price of beans
was $2, and the price of rice was $4. What was
inflation? Did the price changes leave Bob better
off, worse off, or unaffected? What about Rita?
c. Finally, suppose that in 2023, the price of beans
was $2, and the price of rice was $1.50. What was
inflation? Did the price changes leave Bob better
off, worse off, or unaffected? What about Rita?
d. What matters more to Bob and Rita—the overall
inflation rate or the relative price of rice and beans?

9. Explain whether the following statements are true,
false, or uncertain.
a. “Inflation hurts borrowers and helps lenders
because borrowers must pay a higher rate of
interest.”
b. “If prices change in a way that leaves the overall
price level unchanged, then no one is made better
or worse off.”
c. “Inflation does not reduce the purchasing power
of most workers.”

QuickQuiz Answers
1. d

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 663

2. d

3. b

4. b

5. a

6. c

7. d

8. c

13/09/22 6:47 PM

22718_Ch31_ptg01.indd 664

13/09/22 6:47 PM

Chapter

32

GAUDILAB/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM; LECHATNOIR/E+/GETTY IMAGES

Open-Economy
Macroeconomics:
Basic Concepts

hen you shop for a car, you may compare the latest
models from Ford and Toyota. When you take a vacation, you may consider spending it on a beach in Florida
or in Mexico. When you save for retirement, you may choose
between a mutual fund that buys stock in U.S. companies and
one that buys stock in foreign companies. In all these cases, you
are participating not just in the U.S. economy but also in economies around the world.
International trade yields clear benefits: Trade allows people
to focus on what they do best and to consume goods and services
from around the world. That’s why one of the Ten Principles of
Economics in Chapter 1 is that trade can make everyone better
off. International trade can raise living standards in all countries
by allowing each country to specialize in producing the goods and
services for which it has a comparative advantage.
So far, our study of macroeconomics has largely ignored the
domestic economy’s interaction with the rest of the world. For most
questions in macroeconomics, international issues are peripheral.
For instance, for a basic discussion of frictional unemployment

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 665

14/09/22 10:22 AM

666

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

closed economy
an economy that does
not interact with other
economies in the world

open economy
an economy that interacts
freely with other economies
around the world

or the quantity theory of money, the effects of international trade can safely be
ignored. Indeed, to simplify their models, macroeconomists often assume a closed
economy—an economy that does not interact with other economies.
Yet when macroeconomists study an open economy—one that interacts freely
with other economies around the world—they encounter a whole set of new issues.
This chapter and the next introduce open-economy macroeconomics. We first discuss
the key macroeconomic variables that describe an open economy’s interactions in
world markets. You may have heard of these variables—exports, imports, the trade
balance, and exchange rates—from the news. This chapter explains what these data
mean. The next chapter develops a model of how these variables are determined
and how government policies affect them.

32-1 The International Flows of Goods and Capital
An open economy interacts with other economies in two ways: It buys and sells
goods and services in world product markets, and it buys and sells capital assets
such as stocks and bonds in world financial markets. Here we discuss these two
activities and the close relationship between them.
exports
goods and services
produced domestically
and sold abroad

imports
goods and services
produced abroad and
sold domestically

32-1a The Flow of Goods: Exports, Imports, and Net Exports
Exports are goods and services that are produced domestically and sold abroad,
and imports are goods and services that are produced abroad and sold domestically. When Boeing, the U.S. aircraft manufacturer, builds a plane and sells it to Air
France, the sale is an export for the United States and an import for France. When
Fiat, the Italian car company, makes a car and sells it to a U.S. resident, the sale is
an import for the United States and an export for Italy.
The net exports of any country are the difference between the value of its exports
and the value of its imports:

net exports
the value of a nation’s
exports minus the value
of its imports; also called
the trade balance

trade balance
the value of a nation’s
exports minus the value
of its imports; also called
net exports

trade surplus
an excess of exports over
imports

trade deficit
an excess of imports over
exports

Net exports 5 Value of country’s exports 2 Value of country’s imports.

The Boeing sale raises U.S. net exports, and the Fiat sale reduces them. Because net
exports tell us whether a country is, in sum, a seller or a buyer in world markets
for goods and services, net exports are also called the trade balance. If a country’s
net exports are positive, its exports exceed its imports, indicating that the country
sells more goods and services abroad than it buys from other countries. In this case,
the country is said to run a trade surplus. If a country’s net exports are negative,
its exports are less than its imports, indicating that it sells fewer goods and services
abroad than it buys from other countries. In this case, the country is said to run a
trade deficit. If a country’s net exports are zero, its exports and imports are equal,
and the country is said to have balanced trade.
The next chapter develops a theory that explains an economy’s trade balance,
but even at this early stage, it is easy to think of many factors that might influence
a country’s exports, imports, and net exports. They include:
●

balanced trade

●

a situation in which
exports equal imports

●

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 666

Consumer tastes for domestic and foreign goods
The prices of goods at home and abroad
The exchange rates at which people can use domestic currency to buy foreign currencies

14/09/22 10:22 AM

●
●
●

The incomes of consumers at home and abroad
The cost of transporting goods from country to country
Government policies toward international trade

As these factors change, so does the amount of international trade.

Case
Study

The Increasing Openness of the
U.S. Economy

667

MORT GERBERG/THE NEW YORKER
COLLECTION/WWW.CARTOONBANK.COM

Chapter 32 Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts

“But we’re not just talking about
buying a car—we’re talking about
A significant change in the U.S. economy over the past
confronting this country’s trade defiseven decades has been an increase in the importance
cit with Japan.”
of international trade and finance. It is illustrated in Figure 1, which
shows the total value of goods and services exported and imported
expressed as a percentage of GDP. Despite some short-term drops, such as during the pandemic of 2020, the general trend is upward. In the 1950s, imports and
exports were typically between 4 and 5 percent of GDP. In recent years, they have
been about two or three times that level. The trading partners of the United States
include a diverse group of countries. As of 2021, the largest trading partners, as
measured by the sum of imports and exports, were Mexico, Canada, and China,
each of which represented about 14 percent of total U.S. trade, followed by Japan,
Germany, South Korea, and the United Kingdom.

Figure 1
The Internationalization of the
U.S. Economy

This figure shows exports and imports of the U.S. economy as a percentage of U.S.
GDP since 1950. The substantial increases over time show the increasing importance
of international trade and finance.
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce.

Percent
of GDP
20

15

Imports
10

Exports
5

0

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 667

1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

14/09/22 10:22 AM

668

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

The tendency for international trade to increase during the past several decades
is partly due to improvements in transportation. In 1950, the average merchant
ship carried less than 10,000 tons of cargo; today, many ships carry more than
100,000 tons. The long-distance jet was introduced in 1958 and the wide-body jet in
1967, making air transport far cheaper than it had been previously. These developments have allowed goods that once had to be produced locally to be traded around
the world. Cut flowers grown in Israel are flown to the United States to be sold.
Fresh fruits and vegetables that can grow in the United States only in the summer
can now be consumed there in the winter because they can be shipped from the
Southern Hemisphere.
Advances in telecommunications have also facilitated the increase in international trade by allowing businesses to reach overseas customers more easily. For
example, the first transatlantic telephone cable was not laid until 1956. As recently
as 1966, the technology allowed only 138 simultaneous conversations between
North America and Europe. Today, thanks to e-mail and videoconferencing, it is
often as easy to communicate with a customer across the world as it is to communicate with one across town.
Technological progress has also fostered trade by changing the kinds of goods
that economies produce. When bulky raw materials (such as steel) and perishable
goods (such as foodstuffs) were a large part of the world’s output, transporting
goods was often costly and sometimes impossible. By contrast, goods produced
with modern technology are often light and easy to transport. Consumer electronics, for instance, have low weight for every dollar of value, making them easy to
produce in one country and sell in another. An even more extreme example is the
film industry. Once a studio in Hollywood makes a movie, it can send the film to
audiences abroad at almost zero cost. And indeed, movies are a major export of the
United States.
For most of this period, governments’ trade policies were also a factor in
increasing international trade. As we learned earlier in this book, economists
have long believed that free trade between countries is mutually beneficial. Over
time, most policymakers around the world have come to accept these conclusions.
International agreements have gradually lowered tariffs, import quotas, and other
trade barriers. These pacts include the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT); the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), along with its successor, the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA); and many agreements between the United States and individual countries, such as Australia, Chile,
Colombia, Panama, Singapore, and South Korea. Thus, the pattern of increasing
trade shown in Figure 1 is a phenomenon that most policymakers have endorsed
and encouraged.
During his presidency, Donald Trump challenged these trends. He said that the
United States failed to benefit from past trade agreements, and he used his authority to impose tariffs on many foreign goods. As this book was going to press, the
intentions of the Biden administration were not yet entirely clear, though some
reductions in the tariffs imposed by President Trump were underway. ●

32-1b The Flow of Financial Resources: Net Capital Outflow
Residents of open economies participate not only in world markets for goods and
services but also in world financial markets. A U.S. resident with $30,000 could
use that money to buy a car from Toyota or stock in the Toyota Corporation. The
first transaction would be a flow of goods, while the second would be a flow of
capital.

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 668

14/09/22 10:22 AM

Chapter 32 Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts

The term net capital outflow refers to the difference between the purchase of foreign assets by domestic residents and the purchase of domestic assets by foreigners:
Net capital outflow 5 Purchase of foreign assets by domestic residents
2 Purchase of domestic assets by foreigners.

669

net capital outflow
the purchase of foreign
assets by domestic
residents minus the
purchase of domestic
assets by foreigners

When a U.S. resident buys stock in Petrobras, the Brazilian energy company, the
purchase increases the first term on the right side of this equation and, therefore,
increases U.S. net capital outflow. When a resident of Japan buys a bond issued by
the U.S. government, the purchase increases the second term on the right side of
this equation and, therefore, decreases U.S. net capital outflow.
The flow of capital between the U.S. economy and the rest of the world takes
two forms: foreign direct investment and foreign portfolio investment. An
example of foreign direct investment is McDonald’s opening a fast-food outlet
in Russia. An example of foreign portfolio investment is an American buying
stock in a Russian corporation. In the first case, the American owner (McDonald’s
Corporation) actively manages the investment, while in the second case, the
American owner (the stockholder) has a more passive role. In both cases, U.S.
residents are buying assets located in another country, so both purchases increase
U.S. net capital outflow.
The net capital outflow (sometimes called net foreign investment) can be either
positive or negative. When it is positive, domestic residents are buying more foreign
assets than foreigners are buying domestic assets, and capital is said to be flowing
out of the country. When the net capital outflow is negative, domestic residents are
buying fewer foreign assets than foreigners are buying domestic assets, and capital
is said to be flowing into the country. That is, when net capital outflow is negative,
a country is experiencing a capital inflow.
The next chapter develops a theory to explain net capital outflow. In the meantime, let’s briefly consider some of the variables that influence it:
●
●
●
●

The real interest rates paid on foreign assets
The real interest rates paid on domestic assets
The perceived economic and political risks of holding assets abroad
The government policies that affect foreign ownership of domestic assets

For example, consider U.S. investors deciding whether to buy Mexican government
bonds or U.S. government bonds. (Recall that a bond is, in essence, an IOU of the
issuer.) To make this decision, U.S. investors compare the real interest rates offered on
the two bonds. The higher a bond’s real interest rate, the more attractive it is. While
making this comparison, however, U.S. investors must also take into account the risk
that one of these governments might default on its debt (that is, not pay interest or
principal when it is due), as well as any restrictions that the Mexican government
has imposed, or might impose in the future, on foreign investors in Mexico.

32-1c The Equality of Net Exports and Net Capital Outflow
We have seen that an open economy interacts with the rest of the world in two
ways—in markets for goods and services and in financial markets. Net exports and
net capital outflow each measure a type of imbalance in these markets. Net exports
measure an imbalance between a country’s exports and its imports. Net capital
outflow measures an imbalance between the amount of foreign assets bought by
domestic residents and the amount of domestic assets bought by foreigners.

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 669

14/09/22 10:22 AM

670

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

An important but subtle fact of accounting states that, for an economy as a whole,
net capital outflow (NCO) equals net exports (NX):
NCO 5 NX.

This equation holds because every transaction that affects one side of this equation
affects the other side by the same amount. This equation is an identity—an equation
that must hold because of how the variables in the equation are defined and measured.
To see why this accounting identity is true, consider an example. Imagine that
you are a computer programmer in the United States. One day, you write some
software and sell it to a Japanese consumer for 10,000 yen. The sale of software is
an export of the United States, so it increases U.S. net exports. What else happens
to ensure that this identity holds? The answer depends on what you do with the
10,000 yen you are paid.
First, suppose that you simply stuff the yen in your mattress. (We might say you
have a yen for yen.) In this case, you are using some of your income to invest in the
Japanese economy. That is, a domestic resident (you) has acquired a foreign asset
(the Japanese currency). The increase in U.S. net exports is matched by an increase
in the U.S. net capital outflow.
But if you want to invest in the Japanese economy, you probably won’t do so by
holding on to Japanese currency. More likely, you will use the 10,000 yen to buy
stock in a Japanese corporation, or you might buy a Japanese government bond. Yet,
from the standpoint of economic accounting, the result of your decision is much the
same: A domestic resident ends up acquiring a foreign asset. The increase in U.S.
net capital outflow (the purchase of the Japanese stock or bond) equals the increase
in U.S. net exports (the sale of software).
Now suppose that instead of using the 10,000 yen to buy a Japanese asset, you
use it to buy a good made in Japan, such as a Sony TV. Because of your TV purchase,
U.S. imports increase. Together, the software export and the TV import represent
balanced trade. Because exports and imports increase by the same amount, net
exports are unchanged. In this case, no American ends up acquiring a foreign asset,
and no foreigner ends up acquiring a U.S. asset, so there is also no impact on U.S.
net capital outflow.
A final possibility is that you go to a local bank to exchange your 10,000 yen for
U.S. dollars. But this decision doesn’t change the situation because the bank must
now do something with the 10,000 yen. It can buy Japanese assets (a U.S. net capital
outflow), it can buy a Japanese good (a U.S. import), or it can sell the yen to another
American who wants to make such a transaction. In the end, U.S. net exports must
equal U.S. net capital outflow.
This example started with a U.S. programmer selling some software abroad, but
the story is much the same when Americans buy goods and services from other
countries. For example, if Walmart buys $50 million of clothing from China and
sells it to American consumers, something must happen to that $50 million. China
could invest the $50 million in the U.S. economy. This capital inflow from China
might take the form of Chinese purchases of U.S. government bonds. In this case,
the purchase of the clothing reduces U.S. net exports, and the sale of bonds reduces
U.S. net capital outflow. Alternatively, China could use the $50 million to buy a plane
from Boeing, the U.S. aircraft manufacturer. In this case, the U.S. import of clothing
balances the U.S. export of aircraft, so net exports and net capital outflow are both
unchanged. In all cases, the transactions have the same effect on net exports and
net capital outflow.

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 670

14/09/22 10:22 AM

Chapter 32 Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts

671

Let’s recap:
●

●

When a nation is running a trade surplus (NX . 0), it is selling more goods
and services to foreigners than it is buying from them. What is it doing
with the foreign currency it receives from the net sale of goods and services
abroad? It must be using it to buy foreign assets. Capital is flowing out of
the country (NCO . 0).
When a nation is running a trade deficit (NX , 0), it is buying more goods
and services from foreigners than it is selling to them. How is it financing
the net purchase of these goods and services in world markets? It must be
selling assets abroad. Capital is flowing into the country (NCO , 0).

The international flow of goods and services and the international flow of capital
are two sides of the same coin.

32-1d Saving, Investment, and Their Relationship
to International Flows
A nation’s saving and investment are crucial to its long-run economic growth. As
an earlier chapter explained, in a closed economy, saving equals investment. But
matters are not as simple in an open economy. We now consider how saving and
investment are related to the international flows of goods and capital as measured
by net exports and net capital outflow.
As you may recall, the term net exports appeared earlier in the book when we
introduced gross domestic product. The economy’s GDP (denoted Y) is divided
among four components: consumption (C), investment (I), government purchases
(G), and net exports (NX). We write this as
Y 5 C 1 I 1 G 1 NX.

The total expenditure on the economy’s output of goods and services is the sum of
expenditure on consumption, investment, government purchases, and net exports.
Because each dollar of expenditure is placed into one of these four components, this
equation is an accounting identity: It must be true because of the way the variables
are defined and measured.
Recall that national saving is the income of the nation that is left after paying
for current consumption and government purchases. National saving (S) equals
Y 2 C 2 G. If we rearrange the equation to reflect this fact, we obtain
Y 2 C 2 G 5 I 1 NX
S 5 I 1 NX.

Because net exports (NX) also equal net capital outflow (NCO), we can write this
equation as
S5
Saving 5

I

1

NCO

Net capital
Domestic
1
.
outflow
investment

This equation states that a nation’s saving must equal its domestic investment plus
its net capital outflow. In other words, when a U.S. household saves a dollar of its

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 671

14/09/22 10:22 AM

672

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

income for the future, that dollar can be used to finance either the accumulation of
domestic capital or the purchase of foreign capital.
This equation may look familiar. Earlier in the book, when analyzing the financial system, we saw this identity for the special case of a closed economy. In a
closed economy, net capital outflow is zero (NCO 5 0), so saving equals investment
(S 5 I). By contrast, an open economy has two uses for its saving: domestic investment and net capital outflow.
As before, the financial system can be seen as standing between the two sides
of this identity. For example, suppose the Garcia family decides to save some of its
income for retirement. This decision contributes to national saving, the left side of
the equation. If the Garcias deposit their saving in a mutual fund, the fund may
use some of the deposit to buy stock issued by General Motors, which uses the
proceeds to build a factory in Ohio. In addition, the mutual fund may use some of
the Garcias’ deposit to buy stock issued by Toyota, which uses the proceeds to build
a factory in Osaka. These transactions show up on the right side of the equation.
From the standpoint of U.S. accounting, the General Motors expenditure on the
factory is domestic investment, and the purchase of Toyota stock by a U.S. resident
is net capital outflow. Thus, all saving in the U.S. economy shows up as investment
in the U.S. economy or as U.S. net capital outflow.
The bottom line is that saving, investment, and international capital flows are
inextricably linked. When a nation’s saving exceeds its domestic investment, its net
capital outflow is positive, indicating that the nation is using some of its saving to
buy assets abroad. When a nation’s domestic investment exceeds its saving, its net
capital outflow is negative, indicating that foreigners are financing some of this
investment by purchasing domestic assets.

32-1e Summing Up
Table 1 summarizes many of these ideas. It describes the three possibilities for an
open economy: a country with a trade deficit, a country with balanced trade, and
a country with a trade surplus.
Consider first a country with a trade surplus. By definition, a trade surplus
means that the value of exports exceeds the value of imports. Because net exports
are exports minus imports, net exports, NX, are positive. As a result, income,
Y 5 C 1 I 1 G 1 NX, exceeds domestic spending, C 1 I 1 G. But if income, Y, is
more than spending, C 1 I 1 G, then saving, S 5 Y 2 C 2 G, must be more than
investment, I. Because the country is saving more than it is investing, it must be
sending some of its saving abroad. That is, the net capital outflow must be positive.

Table 1
International Flows of Goods
and Capital: Summary

Trade Deficit

Balanced Trade

Trade Surplus

Exports , Imports

Exports 5 Imports

Exports . Imports

This table shows the three
possible outcomes for an open
economy.

Net Exports < 0

Net Exports 5 0

Net Exports . 0

Y,C1I1G

Y5C1I1G

Y.C1I1G

Saving , Investment

Saving 5 Investment

Saving . Investment

Net Capital Outflow , 0

Net Capital Outflow 5 0

Net Capital Outflow . 0

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 672

14/09/22 10:22 AM

Chapter 32 Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts

673

Similar logic applies to a country with a trade deficit (such as the U.S. economy in
recent years). By definition, a trade deficit means that the value of exports is less than
the value of imports. Because net exports are exports minus imports, net exports,
NX, are negative. Thus, income, Y 5 C 1 I 1 G 1 NX, must be less than domestic
spending, C 1 I 1 G. But if income, Y, is less than spending, C 1 I 1 G, then saving,
S 5 Y 2 C 2 G, must be less than investment, I. Because the country is investing
more than it is saving, it must be financing some domestic investment by selling
assets abroad. That is, the net capital outflow must be negative.
A country with balanced trade falls between these cases. Exports equal imports,
so net exports are zero. Income equals domestic spending, and saving equals investment. The net capital outflow equals zero.

Case
Study

Is the U.S. Trade Deficit a National Problem?

You may have heard the United States called “the world’s largest
debtor.” It earned that description by borrowing heavily in world
financial markets during the past four decades to finance large
trade deficits. Why did the United States do this, and should this practice give
Americans reason to worry?
To answer these questions, let’s see what the macroeconomic accounting identities tell us about the U.S. economy. Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows national saving and
domestic investment as a percentage of GDP since 1960. Panel (b) shows net capital
outflow (that is, the trade balance) as a percentage of GDP. Notice that, as the identities require, net capital outflow always equals national saving minus domestic
investment. The figure shows that both national saving and domestic investment
as a percentage of GDP fluctuate substantially over time. Before 1980, they tended
to fluctuate together, so the net capital outflow was typically small—between
−1 and 1 percent of GDP. Since 1980, national saving has often fallen well below
domestic investment, leading to sizable trade deficits and substantial inflows of
capital. That is, in recent decades, the net capital outflow has often been a large
negative number.
The fluctuations in Figure 2 may seem bewildering. They have been the source of
much controversy in American politics. To reach a deeper understanding, we need
to go beyond these data and discuss the policies and events that influence national
saving and domestic investment. History shows that there is no single cause of
trade deficits. Rather, they can arise under a variety of circumstances. Here are four
historical episodes.
Unbalanced fiscal policy: From 1980 to 1987, the flow of capital into the United
States went from 0.5 to 2.9 percent of GDP. This 2.4 percentage point change is
largely attributable to a fall in national saving of 2.7 percentage points. The decline
in national saving, in turn, is often explained by the reduction in public saving—
that is, the increase in the government budget deficit. These budget deficits arose
because President Ronald Reagan cut taxes and increased defense spending without enacting his proposed cuts in nondefense spending.
An investment boom: A different story explains the trade deficits that arose
during the next decade. From 1991 to 2000, the capital flow into the United States
went from 0.5 to 3.7 percent of GDP. None of this 3.2 percentage point change is
attributable to a decline in saving; in fact, saving increased over this time as the
government’s budget switched from deficit to surplus. But investment went from
15.3 to 19.9 percent of GDP as information technology saw tremendous advances,
and many firms were eager to make high-tech investments.

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 673

14/09/22 10:22 AM

674

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

Figure 2
National Saving,
Domestic Investment,
and Net Capital
Outflow
Panel (a) shows
national saving
and domestic
investment as a
percentage of GDP.
Panel (b) shows
net capital outflow
as a percentage of
GDP. You can see
from the figure that
national saving has
been lower since
1980 than it was
before 1980. This
fall in national
saving has been
reflected primarily in
reduced net capital
outflow rather than
in reduced domestic
investment.
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce.

(a) National Saving and Domestic Investment (as a percentage of GDP)
Percent
of GDP
22
Domestic investment
20
18
16

14

National saving

12
10
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2010

2015

2020

(b) Net Capital Outflow (as a percentage of GDP)
Percent
of GDP
2

Net capital
outflow

1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

An economic downturn and recovery: From 2000 to 2019, the capital flow into
the United States remained large. The consistency of this variable, however, stands
in stark contrast to the remarkable changes in saving and investment. From 2000
to 2009, both fell by about 6 percentage points. Investment dropped because tough
economic times made capital accumulation less profitable, while national saving
declined because the government began running extraordinarily large budget deficits

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 674

14/09/22 10:22 AM

Chapter 32 Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts

in response to the recession of 2008–2009. From 2009 to 2019, as the
economy recovered, these forces reversed themselves, and both
saving and investment increased by more than 4 percentage points.
Pandemic spending: From 2019 to 2021, the U.S. trade deficit and capital inflow increased by 1.2 percentage points. This
change is entirely attributable to a decline in national saving.
During this time, the federal government vastly increased government spending in response to the Covid-19 pandemic, leading
to large budget deficits and lower national saving.
Are these trade deficits and international capital flows a problem for the U.S. economy? There is no easy answer. One must
evaluate the circumstances and possible alternatives.
Consider first a trade deficit induced by a fall in saving, as
occurred during the 1980s. Lower saving means that the nation is
putting away less income to provide for the future. Once national
saving has fallen, however, there is no reason to deplore the
resulting trade deficits. If national saving fell without inducing
a trade deficit, investment in the United States would have to
fall. This fall in investment, in turn, would adversely affect the
growth in the capital stock, labor productivity, and real wages.
In other words, once U.S. saving has declined, it is better to have
foreigners invest in the U.S. economy than no one at all.
Now consider a trade deficit induced by an investment boom,
like the trade deficits of the 1990s. In this case, the economy is borrowing from abroad to finance the purchase of new capital goods.
If this additional capital provides a good return in the form of
higher production of goods and services, then the economy should
be able to handle the debts it has accumulated. On the other hand,
if the investment projects fail to yield the expected returns, the
debts will look less desirable, at least with the benefit of hindsight.
Just as an individual can go into debt in either a prudent or a
profligate manner, so can a nation. A trade deficit is not a problem
in itself, but it can sometimes be a symptom of a problem. ●

Ask the
Experts

675

Trade Balances
and Trade
Negotiations

“A typical country can increase its citizens’ welfare by enacting
policies that would increase its trade surplus (or decrease its
trade deficit).”
What do economists say?

66%
disagree

28%
uncertain
6%
agree

“An important reason why many workers in Michigan and Ohio
have lost jobs in recent years is because U.S. presidential
administrations over the past 30 years have not been tough
enough in trade negotiations.”
What do economists say?

87%
disagree

10%
uncertain
3%
agree

Source: IGM Economic Experts Panel, December 9, 2014 and March 22, 2016.

QuickQuiz
1. As a percentage of U.S. GDP, exports are now
_________ and imports are now _______ than they
were in 1950.
a. higher; higher
b. lower; lower
c. higher; lower
d. lower; higher
2. In an open economy, national saving equals domestic
investment
a. plus the government’s budget deficit.
b. minus the net exports of goods and services.
c. plus the net outflow of capital.
d. minus foreign portfolio investment.

3. If the value of a nation’s imports exceeds the value of
its exports, which of the following is NOT true?
a. Net exports are negative.
b. GDP is less than the sum of consumption,
investment, and government purchases.
c. Domestic investment exceeds national saving.
d. The nation is experiencing a net outflow of
capital.

Answers are at the end of the chapter.

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 675

14/09/22 10:22 AM

676

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

32-2 The Prices for International Transactions: Real and
Nominal Exchange Rates
So far, we have discussed measures of the flow of goods and services and the flow
of capital across a nation’s border. In addition to these quantity variables, macroeconomists also study the prices at which these international transactions take
place. Just as the price in any market coordinates buyers and sellers, international
prices coordinate consumers, producers, and investors as they interact in world
markets. Two of the most important of these international prices are the nominal
and real exchange rates.

32-2a Nominal Exchange Rates
nominal exchange rate
the rate at which a
person can trade the
currency of one country
for the currency of
another

appreciation
an increase in the value
of a currency as measured
by the amount of foreign
currency it can buy

depreciation
a decrease in the value of
a currency as measured
by the amount of foreign
currency it can buy

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 676

The nominal exchange rate tells you how much you will receive if you trade the
currency of one country for the currency of another. For example, when you go to
a bank, you might see a posted exchange rate of 80 yen per dollar. If you give the
bank 1 U.S. dollar, you will receive 80 Japanese yen in return, and if you give the
bank 80 Japanese yen, you will receive 1 U.S. dollar. (In actuality, the bank posts
slightly different prices for buying and selling yen. The difference compensates the
bank for offering this service. For our purposes, we can ignore this detail.)
An exchange rate can always be expressed in two ways. If the exchange rate is
80 yen per dollar, it is also 1/80 (5 0.0125) dollar per yen. This book expresses the
nominal exchange rate as units of foreign currency per U.S. dollar, such as 80 yen
per dollar.
If the exchange rate changes so a dollar buys more foreign currency, that
change is called an appreciation of the dollar. If the exchange rate changes
so a dollar buys less foreign currency, that is a depreciation of the dollar. For
example, when the exchange rate rises from 80 to 90 yen per dollar, the dollar
is said to appreciate. At the same time, because a Japanese yen now buys less
of the U.S. currency, the yen is said to depreciate. When the exchange rate falls
from 80 to 70 yen per dollar, the dollar is said to depreciate, and the yen is said
to appreciate.
At times, you may have heard that the dollar is either “strong” or “weak.” These
descriptions usually refer to recent changes in the nominal exchange rate. When a
currency appreciates, it is said to strengthen because it can then buy more foreign
currency. Similarly, when a currency depreciates, it is said to weaken. Perhaps
because the word “strong” is more stirring than the word “weak,” government
officials are prone to say that they favor a strong currency. From an economist’s
standpoint, however, exchange rates are just prices, and there is nothing inherently
better about them being high or low.
For any country, there are many nominal exchange rates. The U.S. dollar can
be used to buy Japanese yen, British pounds, Mexican pesos, and so on. When
economists study changes in the exchange rate, they often use indexes that average these rates. Just as the consumer price index turns the vast number of prices
in the economy into a single measure of the price level, an exchange-rate index
turns many exchange rates into a single measure of a currency’s international
value. So when economists talk about the dollar appreciating or depreciating,
they often are referring to an exchange-rate index that includes many individual
exchange rates.

14/09/22 10:22 AM

Chapter 32 Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts

677

The Euro
ou may have once heard of, or perhaps even seen,
a French franc, a German mark, or an Italian lira.
These former national currencies no longer function
as money. During the 1990s, many European nations
decided to give up their national currencies and
instead use a common currency called the euro.
The euro started circulating on January 1, 2002,
when 12 nations began using it as their official
money. As of 2021, the euro is used in about two
dozen nations, encompassing 340 million people.
A number of other European countries, however,
have kept their own currencies, including the United
Kingdom, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Bulgaria, and
the Czech Republic.
Monetary policy for the euro area is set by the
European Central Bank (ECB), which brings together representatives from
all the participating countries. The ECB issues the euro and controls the
supply of this money, much as the Federal Reserve controls the supply of
dollars in the U.S. economy.
Why did these countries adopt a common currency? One benefit is that
it makes trade easier. Imagine if each of the 50 U.S. states had a different
currency. Every time you crossed a state border, you would need to change
your money. And when comparing prices in different states, you would have
to perform the kind of exchange-rate calculations discussed in the text.
This would be inconvenient, and it might deter you from buying goods and
services outside your own state. The countries of Europe decided that as

their economies became more integrated, it would be
better to avoid this inconvenience.
To some extent, the adoption of a common currency in Europe was a political decision that went
beyond economic concerns. Some advocates of the
euro wanted to reduce nationalistic feelings and to
make Europeans appreciate more fully their shared
history and destiny. A single money for most of the
continent, they argued, would help achieve this goal.
There are, however, costs to adopting a common
currency. When nations use the same money, they are
committing to sharing a single monetary policy. If they
disagree about what monetary policy is best, they will
have to compromise, rather than each country going
its own way. Because a common currency has both
benefits and costs, economists differ on whether Europe’s adoption of the
euro has been a good decision.
From 2010 to 2015, the question of the euro as a pan-European currency heated up as several European nations dealt with economic difficulties. Greece, in particular, had run up a large government debt and found
itself facing possible default. As a result, it had to raise taxes and cut back
government spending substantially. Some observers suggested that dealing with these problems would have been easier if the Greek government
had had an additional tool—a national monetary policy. The possibility
of Greece leaving the euro area and reintroducing its own currency was
discussed, but in the end, that outcome did not occur. ■
PETER STONE/ALAMY STOCK PHOTO

Y

32-2b Real Exchange Rates
The real exchange rate is the rate at which you can trade the goods and services
of one country for those of another. For example, if you go shopping and find that
a pound of Swiss cheese is twice as expensive as a pound of American cheese, the
real exchange rate is ½ pound of Swiss cheese per pound of American cheese. Notice
that, like the nominal exchange rate, the real exchange rate is expressed as units
of the foreign item per unit of the domestic item. But in this instance, the item is a
good rather than a currency.
Real and nominal exchange rates are closely related. For example, suppose that
a bushel of American rice sells for $100, and a bushel of Japanese rice sells for
16,000 yen. What is the real exchange rate between American and Japanese rice? To
answer this question, we must first use the nominal exchange rate to convert the
prices into a common currency. If the nominal exchange rate is 80 yen per dollar,

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 677

real exchange rate
the rate at which a person
can trade the goods and
services of one country
for the goods and services
of another

14/09/22 10:22 AM

678

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

then the price for American rice of $100 per bushel is equivalent to 8,000 yen per
bushel. American rice is half as expensive as Japanese rice. The real exchange rate
is ½ bushel of Japanese rice per bushel of American rice.
We can summarize this calculation for the real exchange rate with the following
formula:
Real exchange rate 5

Nominal exchange rate 3 Domestic price
.
Foreign price

Using the numbers in our example, the formula applies as follows:
Real exchange rate 5
5

(80 yen/dollar) 3 ($100/bushel of American rice)
16,000 yen/bushel of Japanese rice
8,000 yen/bushel of American rice
16,000 yen/bushel of Japanese rice

5 1 2 bushel of Japanese rice/bushel of American rice.

Thus, the real exchange rate depends on the nominal exchange rate and on the prices
of goods in the two countries measured in the local currencies.
The real exchange rate is a key determinant of how much a country exports and
imports. When Ben’s Original is deciding whether to buy U.S. rice or Japanese rice
to put into its boxes, it will ask which rice is cheaper. The real exchange rate gives
the answer. As another example, imagine that you are deciding whether to take a
seaside vacation in Miami, Florida, or in Cancún, Mexico. You might ask your travel
agent the price of a hotel room in Miami (measured in dollars), the price of a hotel
room in Cancún (measured in pesos), and the exchange rate between pesos and
dollars. If you decide where to vacation by comparing costs, you are basing your
decision on the real exchange rate.
When studying an economy as a whole, macroeconomists focus on overall prices
rather than the prices of individual items. That is, to measure the real exchange
rate, they use price indexes, such as the consumer price index, which measure the
price of a basket of goods and services. By using a price index for a U.S. basket (P),
a price index for a foreign basket (P*), and the nominal exchange rate between the
U.S. dollar and foreign currencies (e), we can compute the overall real exchange
rate between the United States and other countries as follows:
Real exchange rate 5 (e 3 P)/P∗ .

This real exchange rate measures the price of a basket of goods and services available
domestically relative to a basket of goods and services available abroad.
As the next chapter will discuss more fully, a country’s real exchange rate is a
key determinant of its net exports of goods and services. A depreciation (fall) in
the U.S. real exchange rate means that U.S. goods have become cheaper compared
with foreign goods. This change encourages consumers both at home and abroad
to buy more from the United States and less from other countries. As a result, U.S.
exports rise, and U.S. imports fall. Both of these changes increase U.S. net exports.
Conversely, an appreciation (rise) in the U.S. real exchange rate means that U.S.
goods have become more expensive compared with foreign goods, so U.S. net
exports decline.

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 678

14/09/22 10:22 AM

Chapter 32 Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts

679

QuickQuiz
4. If a nation’s currency doubles in value on foreign
exchange markets, the currency is said to ________,
reflecting a change in the ________ exchange rate.
a. appreciate; nominal
b. appreciate; real
c. depreciate; nominal
d. depreciate; real
5. If the U.S. dollar appreciates and prices remain the
same at home and abroad, foreign goods become
________ expensive relative to American goods, pushing the U.S. trade balance toward ________.
a. more; surplus
b. more; deficit
c. less; surplus
d. less; deficit

6. The dollar-yen exchange rate falls from 100 to 80
yen per dollar. At the same time, the price level in
the United States rises from 180 to 200, and the
price level in Japan remains the same. As a result,
a. American goods have become more expensive relative to Japanese goods.
b. American goods have become less expensive relative to Japanese goods.
c. the relative price of American and Japanese goods
has not changed.
d. both American and Japanese goods have become
relatively less expensive.

Answers are at the end of the chapter.

32-3 A First Theory of Exchange-Rate
Determination: Purchasing-Power Parity
Exchange rates vary substantially over time. In 1970, a U.S. dollar could buy
3.65 German marks or 627 Italian lira. In 1998, as both Germany and Italy were
getting ready to adopt the euro as their common currency, a U.S. dollar could buy
1.76 German marks or 1,737 Italian lira. In other words, over this period, the value
of the dollar fell by more than half compared with the mark, while it more than
doubled compared with the lira.
What explains these large and opposite changes? Economists have developed
many models to explain how exchange rates are determined, each emphasizing some
of the forces at work. Here we consider a simple theory, called purchasing-power
parity, which is generally believed to describe the forces that influence exchange
rates in the long run. It states that a unit of any given currency should be able to
buy the same quantity of goods in all countries. Let’s consider the theory’s logic as
well as its implications and limitations.

32-3a The Basic Logic of Purchasing-Power Parity
The theory of purchasing-power parity is based on a principle called the law of
one price. This law asserts that a good must sell for the same price in all locations.
Otherwise, there would be opportunities for profit left unexploited. For example,
suppose that coffee beans sold for less in Seattle than in Dallas. A person could
buy coffee in Seattle for, say, $4 a pound and then sell it in Dallas for $5 a pound,
making a profit of $1 per pound from the difference in price. The process of taking advantage of price differences for the same item in different markets is called
arbitrage. In this example, as people took advantage of the arbitrage opportunity,
they would increase the demand for coffee in Seattle and increase the supply in
Dallas. The price of coffee would rise in Seattle (in response to greater demand) and
fall in Dallas (in response to greater supply). This process would continue until,
eventually, the prices were the same in the two markets.

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 679

purchasing-power
parity
a theory of exchange rates
that says a unit of any
given currency should
be able to buy the same
quantity of goods in all
countries

14/09/22 10:22 AM

680

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

Now consider how the law of one price applies to the international marketplace.
If a dollar (or any other currency) could buy more coffee in the United States than
in Japan, international traders could profit by buying coffee in the United States
and selling it in Japan. This export of coffee from the United States to Japan would
drive up the U.S. price of coffee and drive down the Japanese price. Conversely,
if a dollar could buy more coffee in Japan than in the United States, traders could
buy coffee in Japan and sell it in the United States. This import of coffee into the
United States from Japan would drive down the U.S. price of coffee and drive up
the Japanese price. In the end, the law of one price tells us that a dollar must buy
the same amount of coffee in all countries.
This logic leads to the theory of purchasing-power parity. According to this theory,
a currency must have the same purchasing power in all countries. That is, a U.S. dollar
must buy the same quantity of goods in the United States and Japan, and a Japanese
yen must buy the same quantity of goods in Japan and the United States. The name
of this theory describes it well. Parity means equality, and purchasing power refers
to the value of money in terms of the quantity of goods it can buy. Purchasing-power
parity states that a unit of a currency must have the same real value in every country.

32-3b Implications of Purchasing-Power Parity
What does the theory of purchasing-power parity say about exchange rates? It tells
us that the nominal exchange rate between the currencies of two countries depends
on the price levels in those countries. If a dollar buys the same quantity of goods in
the United States (where prices are measured in dollars) as in Japan (where prices
are measured in yen), then the number of yen per dollar must reflect the prices
of goods in the United States and Japan. For example, if a pound of coffee costs
500 yen in Japan and $5 in the United States, then the nominal exchange rate must
be 100 yen per dollar (500 yen/$5 5 100 yen per dollar). Otherwise, the purchasing
power of the dollar would not be the same in the two countries.
To see more fully how this works, it is helpful to use just a bit of mathematics.
Suppose that P is the price of a basket of goods in the United States (measured in
dollars), P* is the price of a basket of goods in Japan (measured in yen), and e is
the nominal exchange rate (the number of yen a dollar can buy). Now consider the
quantity of goods a dollar can buy at home and abroad. At home, the price level is
P, so the purchasing power of $1 at home is 1/P. That is, a dollar can buy 1/P units
of goods. Abroad, a dollar can be exchanged into e units of foreign currency, which
in turn have purchasing power e/P*. For the purchasing power of a dollar to be the
same in the two countries, it must be the case that
1/P 5 e/P∗ .

With rearrangement, this equation becomes
1 5 eP/P∗ .

Notice that the left side of this equation is a constant, and the right side is the real
exchange rate. If the purchasing power of the dollar is always the same at home
and abroad, then the real exchange rate—the relative price of domestic and foreign
goods—cannot change.
To see the implication of this analysis for the nominal exchange rate, we can
rearrange the last equation to solve for the nominal exchange rate:
e 5 P∗ /P.

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 680

14/09/22 10:22 AM

Chapter 32 Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts

681

That is, the nominal exchange rate equals the ratio of the foreign price level (measured in units of the foreign currency) to the domestic price level (measured in units
of the domestic currency). According to the theory of purchasing-power parity,
the nominal exchange rate between the currencies of two countries must reflect
the price levels in those countries.
A key implication of purchasing-power parity is that nominal exchange rates
change when price levels change. As the preceding chapter explained, the price level
in any country adjusts to bring the quantity of money supplied and the quantity of
money demanded into balance. Because the nominal exchange rate depends on the
price levels, it also depends on the money supply and demand in each country. When
a central bank in any country increases the money supply and causes the price level
to rise, it also causes that country’s currency to depreciate relative to other currencies in the world. In other words, when the central bank prints large quantities
of money, that money loses value both in terms of the goods and services it can
buy and in terms of the amount of other currencies it can buy.
We can now answer the question that began this section: Why did the U.S. dollar
lose value compared with the German mark and gain value compared with the
Italian lira? The answer is that Germany pursued a less inflationary monetary
policy than the United States, and Italy pursued a more inflationary monetary
policy. From 1970 to 1998, inflation in the United States was 5.3 percent per year.
By contrast, inflation was 3.5 percent in Germany and 9.6 percent in Italy. As U.S.
prices rose relative to German prices, the value of the dollar fell relative to the
mark. Similarly, as U.S. prices fell relative to Italian prices, the value of the dollar
rose relative to the lira.
Germany and Italy now have a common currency—the euro. Sharing a currency
means that the two countries share a single monetary policy and, as a result, have
similar inflation rates. But the historical lessons of the lira and the mark will apply
to the euro as well. Whether the U.S. dollar buys more or fewer euros 20 years from
now than it does today depends on whether the European Central Bank generates
more or less inflation in Europe than the Federal Reserve does in the United States.

Case
Study

The Nominal Exchange Rate during a Hyperinflation

Macroeconomists can only rarely conduct controlled experiments.
Most often, they must glean what they can from the natural
experiments that history gives them. One natural experiment is
hyperinflation—the high inflation that arises when a government turns to the
printing press to pay for large amounts of government spending. Because hyperinflations are so extreme, they illustrate some basic economic principles with clarity.
Consider the German hyperinflation of the early 1920s. Figure 3 shows the
German money supply, the German price level, and the nominal exchange rate
(measured as U.S. cents per German mark) for that period. Notice that these series
move closely together. When the supply of money starts growing quickly, the price
level also takes off, and the German mark depreciates. When the money supply
stabilizes, so do the price level and the exchange rate.
The pattern shown in this figure appears during every hyperinflation. It leaves
no doubt that there is a fundamental link among money, prices, and the nominal
exchange rate. The quantity theory of money discussed in the previous chapter
explains how the money supply affects the price level. The theory of purchasingpower parity discussed here explains how the price level affects the nominal
exchange rate. ●

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 681

14/09/22 10:22 AM

682

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

Figure 3
Money, Prices, and the Nominal
Exchange Rate during the German
Hyperinflation
This figure shows the money
supply, the price level, and the
nominal exchange rate (measured
as U.S. cents per mark) for the
German hyperinflation from
January 1921 to December 1924.
Notice how similarly these three
variables move. When the quantity
of money started growing quickly,
the price level followed, and the
mark depreciated relative to the
dollar. When the German central
bank stabilized the money supply,
the price level and exchange rate
stabilized as well.
Source: Adapted from Thomas J. Sargent, “The End of Four Big
Inflations,” in Robert Hall, ed., Inflation (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1983), pp. 41–93.

Indexes
(Jan. 1921 = 100)

1,000,000,000,000,000

Money supply

10,000,000,000
Price level

100,000

1

Exchange rate

.00001

.0000000001

1921

1922

1923

1924

1925

32-3c Limitations of Purchasing-Power Parity
Purchasing-power parity provides a simple model of how exchange rates are determined. For understanding many economic phenomena, the theory works well. In
particular, it can explain some important long-term trends, such as the depreciation
of the U.S. dollar against the German mark and the appreciation of the U.S. dollar
against the Italian lira. It can also explain the major changes in exchange rates that
occur during hyperinflations.
Yet the theory of purchasing-power parity is not completely accurate. That is,
exchange rates do not always move to ensure that a dollar has the same real value
in all countries all the time. There are two reasons the theory of purchasing-power
parity does not always hold in practice.
The first is that many goods are not easily traded. Imagine, for instance, that
haircuts are more expensive in Paris than in New York. International travelers might
avoid getting their haircuts in Paris, and some haircutters might move from New
York to Paris. Yet such arbitrage would be too limited to eliminate the differences
in prices. The deviation from purchasing-power parity might persist, and a dollar
(or euro) would continue to buy less of a haircut in Paris than in New York.
The second reason that purchasing-power parity does not always hold is that
even tradable goods are not always perfect substitutes when they are produced in
different countries. For example, some consumers prefer German cars, and others
prefer American cars. Moreover, consumer tastes can change over time. If German
cars suddenly become more popular, the increase in demand will drive up the price
of German cars relative to American cars. Despite this difference in prices in the two
markets, there might be no opportunity for profitable arbitrage because consumers
do not view the two country’s cars as equivalent.

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 682

14/09/22 10:22 AM

Chapter 32 Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts

683

Both because some goods are not tradable and because some tradable goods
are not perfect substitutes for their foreign counterparts, purchasing-power parity is not a perfect theory of exchange-rate determination. For these reasons, real
exchange rates fluctuate over time. Nonetheless, the theory of purchasing-power
parity does provide a useful first step in understanding exchange rates. The basic
logic is persuasive: As the real exchange rate drifts from the level predicted by
purchasing-power parity, people have a greater incentive to move goods across
national borders. Even if the forces of purchasing-power parity do not completely
fix the real exchange rate, they provide a reason to expect that changes in the real
exchange rate are most often small or temporary. As a result, large and persistent
movements in nominal exchange rates typically reflect changes in price levels at
home and abroad.

The Hamburger Standard

When economists apply the theory of purchasing-power parity to
explain exchange rates, they need data on the prices of a basket
of goods available in different countries. One analysis of this sort
is conducted by The Economist, an international news magazine. The magazine
occasionally collects data on a basket of goods consisting of “two all-beef patties,
special sauce, lettuce, cheese, pickles, onions, on a sesame seed bun.” It’s called
the “Big Mac” and is sold by McDonald’s around the world.
Once we have the prices of Big Macs in two countries denominated in the
local currencies, we can compute the exchange rate predicted by the theory of
purchasing-power parity. The predicted exchange rate is the one that makes the
cost of a Big Mac the same in the two countries. For instance, if the price of a Big
Mac is $5 in the United States and 500 yen in Japan, purchasing-power parity
would predict an exchange rate of 100 yen per dollar.
How well does purchasing-power parity work when applied using Big Mac
prices? Here are some examples from July 2021, when the price of a Big Mac was
$5.65 in the United States:
Country

Price of a Big Mac

Predicted Exchange Rate

Actual Exchange Rate

Indonesia

34,000 rupiah

6,018 rupiah/$

14,517 rupiah/$

South Korea

4,600 won

814 won/$

1,150 won/$

390 yen

69 yen/$

110 yen/$

Japan
Mexico

64 pesos

11.3 pesos/$

20.1 pesos/$

Sweden

54 krona

9.6 krona/$

8.7 krona/$

China

22.4 renminbi

4.0 renminbi/$

6.5 renminbi/$

Euro area

4.27 euros

0.76 euros/$

0.85 euros/$

Britain

3.49 pounds

0.62 pounds/$

0.73 pounds/$

TESTING/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Case
Study

You can find a Big Mac
almost anywhere you
look.

You can see that the predicted and actual exchange rates are not exactly the same.
After all, international arbitrage in Big Macs is not easy. Yet the two exchange rates
are often in the same ballpark. The theory predicts, for example, that a dollar can
buy the most rupiahs and the fewest pounds, and that is the case. Purchasingpower parity is far from a precise theory of exchange rates, but it can provide a
reasonable first approximation. ●

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 683

14/09/22 10:22 AM

684

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

QuickQuiz
7. If a cup of coffee costs 2 euros in Paris and $6 in
New York and purchasing-power parity holds, what is
the exchange rate?
a. 1/4 euro per dollar
b. 1/3 euro per dollar
c. 3 euros per dollar
d. 4 euros per dollar

8. The theory of purchasing-power parity says that
higher inflation in a nation causes the nation’s
currency to ________, leaving the ________ exchange
rate unchanged.
a. appreciate; nominal
b. appreciate; real
c. depreciate; nominal
d. depreciate; real
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

32-4 Conclusion
This chapter introduced some basic concepts that macroeconomists use to study
open economies. You should now understand what a nation’s trade balance represents and how, in an open economy, domestic investment can differ from national
saving. You should understand why a nation with a trade surplus must be sending
capital abroad and why a nation with a trade deficit must be experiencing a capital
inflow. You should also understand the meaning of nominal and real exchange rates
as well as the implications and limitations of purchasing-power parity as a theory
of exchange rates.
The macroeconomic variables introduced here provide a starting point for analyzing an open economy’s interactions with the rest of the world. The next chapter
develops a model to explain what determines these variables. We can then discuss
how events and policies affect an economy’s trade balance and the rates at which
nations make exchanges in world markets.

Chapter in a Nutshell
• Net exports are the value of domestic goods and services sold abroad (exports) minus the value of foreign
goods and services sold domestically (imports). Net
capital outflow is the acquisition of foreign assets by
domestic residents (capital outflow) minus the acquisition of domestic assets by foreigners (capital inflow).
Because every export is balanced either with an import
or with the acquisition of a capital asset, an economy’s
net exports always equal its net capital outflow.
• An economy’s saving can be used either to finance
investment at home or to buy assets abroad. Thus,
national saving equals domestic investment plus net
capital outflow.
• The nominal exchange rate is the relative price of the
currency of two countries, and the real exchange rate

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 684

is the relative price of the goods and services of two
countries. When the nominal exchange rate changes
so each dollar buys more foreign currency, the dollar
is said to appreciate or strengthen. When the nominal
exchange rate changes so each dollar buys less foreign
currency, the dollar is said to depreciate or weaken.
• According to the theory of purchasing-power parity,
a dollar (or a unit of any other currency) should be
able to buy the same quantity of goods in all countries.
This theory implies that the nominal exchange rate
between the currencies of two countries should reflect
the price levels in those countries. As a result, countries
with relatively high inflation should have depreciating
currencies, and countries with relatively low inflation
should have appreciating currencies.

14/09/22 10:22 AM

Chapter 32 Open-Economy Macroeconomics: Basic Concepts

685

Key Concepts
closed economy, p. 666
open economy, p. 666
exports, p. 666
imports, p. 666
net exports, p. 666

trade balance, p. 666
trade surplus, p. 666
trade deficit, p. 666
balanced trade, p. 666
net capital outflow, p. 669

nominal exchange rate, p. 676
appreciation, p. 676
depreciation, p. 676
real exchange rate, p. 677
purchasing-power parity, p. 679

Questions for Review
1. Define net exports and net capital outflow. Explain
how and why they are related.

4. Describe the economic logic behind the theory of
purchasing-power parity.

2. Explain the relationship among saving, investment,
and net capital outflow.

5. If the Fed started printing large quantities of U.S.
dollars, what would happen to the number of
Japanese yen a dollar could buy? Why?

3. If a Japanese car costs 1,500,000 yen, a similar
American car costs $30,000, and a dollar can buy
100 yen, what are the nominal and real exchange rates?

Problems and Applications
1. How would the following transactions affect U.S.
exports, imports, and net exports?
a. An American art professor spends the summer
touring museums in Europe.
b. Students in Paris flock to see the latest movie from
Hollywood.
c. Your uncle buys a new Fiat.
d. The student bookstore at Oxford University in
England sells a copy of this textbook.
e. A Canadian citizen shops at a store in northern
Vermont to avoid Canadian sales taxes.
2. Would each of the following transactions be included
in U.S. net exports or in U.S. net capital outflow?
Indicate whether it would represent an increase or a
decrease in that variable.
a. An American buys a Sony TV.
b. An American buys a share of Sony stock.
c. The Sony pension fund buys a bond from the U.S.
Treasury.
d. A worker at a Sony plant in Japan buys
some Georgia peaches from an American
farmer.
3. Describe the difference between foreign direct
investment and foreign portfolio investment.
Who is more likely to engage in foreign direct
investment—a corporation or an individual
investor? Who is more likely to engage in foreign
portfolio investment?

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 685

4. Explain how the following transactions would affect U.S.
net capital outflow. For each transaction, state whether it
represents direct investment or portfolio investment.
a. An American cellular phone company establishes
an office in the Czech Republic.
b. Harrods of London sells stock to the General
Motors pension fund.
c. Honda expands its factory in Marysville, Ohio.
d. A Fidelity mutual fund sells its Toyota stock to a
French investor.
5. Would each of the following groups be happy or
unhappy if the U.S. dollar appreciated? Explain.
a. Dutch pension funds holding U.S. government bonds
b. U.S. manufacturing industries
c. Australian tourists planning a trip to the United
States
d. an American firm trying to purchase property
overseas
6. What is happening to the U.S. real exchange rate in
each of the following situations? Explain.
a. The U.S. nominal exchange rate is unchanged, but
prices rise faster in the United States than abroad.
b. The U.S. nominal exchange rate is unchanged, but
prices rise faster abroad than in the United States.
c. The U.S. nominal exchange rate declines, and prices
are unchanged in the United States and abroad.
d. The U.S. nominal exchange rate declines, and
prices rise faster abroad than in the United States.

14/09/22 10:22 AM

686

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

9. Purchasing-power parity holds between the nations
of Ectenia and Wiknam, where the only commodity
is Spam.
a. Right now, a can of Spam costs 4 dollars in Ectenia
and 24 pesos in Wiknam. What is the exchange
rate between Ectenian dollars and Wiknamian
pesos?
b. Over the next 20 years, inflation is expected to be
3.5 percent per year in Ectenia and 7 percent per
year in Wiknam. If this inflation comes to pass,
what will the price of Spam and the exchange rate
be in 20 years? (Hint: Recall the rule of 70 from
Chapter 28.)
c. Which of these two nations will likely have a
higher nominal interest rate? Why?
d. A friend of yours suggests a get-rich-quick
scheme: Borrow from the nation with the lower
nominal interest rate, invest in the nation with the
higher nominal interest rate, and profit from the
interest-rate differential. Do you see any potential
problems with this idea? Explain.

7. A can of soda costs $1.25 in the United States and
25 pesos in Mexico. What is the peso–dollar exchange
rate (measured in pesos per dollar) if purchasingpower parity holds? If a monetary expansion causes all
prices in Mexico to double so a soda now costs 50 pesos,
what happens to the peso–dollar exchange rate?
8. A case study in the chapter analyzed purchasingpower parity using the prices of Big Macs in several
countries. Here are data for a few more countries:

Country

Price of a
Big Mac

Predicted
Exchange
Rate

Actual
Exchange
Rate

Chile

2,990 pesos

_____ pesos/$

759 pesos/$

900 forints

_____ forints/$

305 forints/$

Hungary
Czech
Republic

89 korunas

_____ korunas/$

21.8 korunas/$

Brazil

22.9 real

_____ real/$

5.25 real/$

Canada

6.77 C$

_____ C$/$

1.27 C$/$

a. For each country, compute the predicted exchange
rate in terms of the local currency per U.S. dollar.
(Recall that the U.S. price of a Big Mac was $5.65.)
b. According to purchasing-power parity, what is
the predicted exchange rate between the Chilean
peso and the Canadian dollar? What is the actual
exchange rate?
c. How well does the theory of purchasing-power
parity explain exchange rates?

QuickQuiz Answers
1. a

22718_Ch32_ptg01.indd 686

2. c

3. d

4. a

5. d

6. b

7. b

8. d

14/09/22 10:22 AM

Chapter

33

BLACKCAT/E+/GETTY IMAGES; GOWITHSTOCK/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

A Macroeconomic
Theory of the
Open Economy

ver the past few decades, the United States has consistently imported more goods and services than it has exported.
That is, U.S. net exports have been negative. While
economists debate whether these trade deficits are a problem for
the U.S. economy, the nation’s business community often has a
strong opinion. Many business leaders claim that the trade deficits reflect unfair competition: Foreign firms are allowed to sell
their products in U.S. markets, they contend, while foreign governments impede U.S. firms from selling U.S. products abroad.
Imagine that you are the president, and you want to end these
trade deficits. What should you do? Should you limit imports, perhaps by imposing a quota on European steel or a tariff on Chinese
smartphones? Or should you address the nation’s trade deficit in
some other way?
To understand what determines a country’s trade balance and
how government policies can affect it, we need a macroeconomic
theory that explains how an open economy works. The preceding
chapter introduced the key macroeconomic variables that describe
an economy’s relationship with other economies, including net

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 687

13/09/22 6:46 PM

688

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

exports, net capital outflow, and the real and nominal exchange rates. This chapter
develops a model that identifies the forces that influence these variables and explains
how these variables are related to one another.
To develop this macroeconomic model of an open economy, we build on our
previous analysis in two ways. First, the model takes the economy’s GDP as given.
We assume that the economy’s output of goods and services, as measured by
real GDP, is determined by the quantities of the factors of production and by the
available production technology that turns these inputs into output. Second, the
model takes the economy’s price level as given. We assume that the price level
adjusts to balance the supply and demand for money. In other words, this chapter
starts with the lessons from previous chapters about the economy’s output and
price level and focuses on the forces that determine the economy’s trade balance
and exchange rate.
In one sense, the model is simple: It applies the tools of supply and demand to
an open economy. Yet it is also more complex than others we have seen because
it involves the simultaneous equilibrium in two related markets: the market for
loanable funds and the market for foreign-currency exchange. After developing
the model, we use it to examine how events and policies affect an economy’s
trade balance and exchange rate. We can then say which government policies
are likely to reverse the trade deficits that the U.S. economy has experienced in
recent years.

33-1 Supply and Demand for Loanable Funds
and for Foreign-Currency Exchange
To understand the forces at work in an open economy, we focus on supply and
demand in two markets. The first is the market for loanable funds, which coordinates national saving, domestic investment, and the flow of loanable funds
to be invested abroad (called the net capital outflow). The second is the market
for foreign-currency exchange, which coordinates people who want to trade
domestic and foreign monies. This section discusses supply and demand in each
of these markets separately. The next section puts them together to explain an
open economy’s overall equilibrium.

33-1a The Market for Loanable Funds
Our model of the open economy makes the simplifying assumption that the financial system has only one market, the market for loanable funds. All savers go to
this market to deposit their saving, and all borrowers go there to get their loans.
In this market, there is one interest rate, which is both the return to saving and the
cost of borrowing.
To understand the market for loanable funds in an open economy, let’s start with
the identity from the preceding chapter:
S

5

I

1

NCO

Saving 5 Domestic 1 Net capital .
outflow
investment

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 688

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 33 A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy

689

When a nation saves a dollar of its income, it can use that dollar to finance
the purchase of domestic capital or to finance the purchase of an asset abroad.
The two sides of this identity represent the two sides of the market for loanable funds. The supply of loanable funds comes from national saving (S), and
the demand for loanable funds comes from domestic investment (I) and net
capital outflow (NCO).
Loanable funds in this model represent the domestically generated flow of
resources available for capital accumulation. The purchase of a capital asset adds
to the demand for loanable funds, regardless of whether that asset is located at
home (I) or abroad (NCO). Net capital outflow can be positive or negative, so
it can add to or subtract from the demand for loanable funds that arises from
domestic investment. When NCO . 0, the country has a net outflow of capital;
the net purchase of capital overseas adds to the demand for domestically generated loanable funds. When NCO , 0, the country has a net inflow of capital;
the capital resources coming from abroad reduce the demand for domestically
generated loanable funds.
Recall that the quantity of loanable funds supplied and the quantity of loanable
funds demanded depend on the real interest rate. A higher real interest rate means
a higher return to saving, which encourages people to save and therefore raises the
quantity of loanable funds supplied. A higher interest rate also means a higher cost
of borrowing to finance capital projects, which discourages investment and reduces
the quantity of loanable funds demanded.
In addition to influencing national saving and domestic investment, a country’s real interest rate affects its net capital outflow. To see why, consider two
mutual funds—one in the United States and one in Germany—deciding whether
to buy a U.S. bond or a German bond. Each mutual fund manager would make
this decision in part by comparing the real interest rates in the two countries.
When the U.S. real interest rate rises, the U.S. bond becomes more attractive,
discouraging Americans from buying foreign assets and encouraging foreigners
to buy U.S. assets. For both reasons, a rise in the U.S. real interest rate reduces
U.S. net capital outflow.
The familiar supply-and-demand diagram in Figure 1 illustrates the market for
loanable funds. As in our earlier analysis of the financial system, the supply curve
slopes upward because a higher interest rate increases the quantity of loanable
funds supplied, and the demand curve slopes downward because a higher interest
rate decreases the quantity of loanable funds demanded. Unlike the situation in
our previous discussion, however, the demand side of the market now represents
both domestic investment and net capital outflow. That is, in an open economy, the
demand for loanable funds comes not only from those who want loanable funds to
buy domestic capital goods but also from those who want loanable funds to buy
foreign assets.
The interest rate adjusts to bring the supply and demand for loanable funds
into balance. If the interest rate were below the equilibrium level, the quantity of
loanable funds supplied would be less than the quantity demanded. The resulting
shortage of loanable funds would push the interest rate upward. Conversely, if
the interest rate were above the equilibrium level, the quantity of loanable funds
supplied would exceed the quantity demanded. The surplus of loanable funds
would drive the interest rate downward. At the equilibrium interest rate, the supply exactly balances the demand. In other words, at the equilibrium interest rate,
the amount that people want to save exactly balances the desired quantities of
domestic investment and net capital outflow.

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 689

13/09/22 6:46 PM

690

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

Figure 1
The Market for Loanable Funds
The interest rate in an open economy,
as in a closed economy, is determined
by the supply and demand for loanable
funds. National saving is the source of
the supply of loanable funds. Domestic
investment and net capital outflow are
the sources of the demand for loanable
funds. At the equilibrium interest rate,
the amount that people want to save
balances the amount that people want
to borrow for the purpose of buying
domestic capital and foreign assets.

Real
Interest
Rate
Supply of loanable funds
(from national saving)

Equilibrium
real interest
rate

Demand for loanable
funds (for domestic
investment and net
capital outflow)
Quantity of
Loanable Funds

Equilibrium
quantity

33-1b The Market for Foreign-Currency Exchange
The second market in this model of the open economy is the market for foreigncurrency exchange. Participants in the market trade U.S. dollars in exchange
for foreign currencies. The analysis starts with another identity from the last
chapter:
NCO

5

NX

Net capital outflow 5 Net exports.

This identity states that the imbalance between the purchase and sale of capital assets abroad (NCO) equals the imbalance between exports and imports of
goods and services (NX). For example, when the U.S. economy is running a
trade surplus (NX . 0), foreigners are buying more U.S. goods and services
than Americans are buying foreign goods and services. What are Americans
doing with the foreign currency they are getting from this net sale of goods and
services abroad? They must be buying foreign assets, so U.S. capital is flowing
abroad (NCO . 0). Conversely, if the United States is running a trade deficit
(NX , 0), Americans are spending more on foreign goods and services than they
are earning from selling goods and services abroad. Some of this spending must
be financed by selling American assets abroad, so foreign capital is flowing into
the United States (NCO , 0).
This model of the open economy treats the two sides of the identity as representing the two sides of the market for foreign-currency exchange. Net capital outflow
represents the quantity of dollars supplied for the purpose of buying foreign assets.
For example, when a U.S. mutual fund buys a Japanese bond, it must first change
dollars into yen, so it supplies dollars in the market for foreign-currency exchange.
Net exports represent the quantity of dollars demanded for the purpose of buying

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 690

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 33 A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy

691

U.S. net exports of goods and services. For example, when a Japanese airline buys
a plane from Boeing, it must first change its yen into dollars, so it demands dollars
in the market for foreign-currency exchange.
What price balances the supply and demand in the market for foreign-currency
exchange? The answer is the real exchange rate. As the preceding chapter discussed,
the real exchange rate is the relative price of domestic and foreign goods and a key
determinant of net exports. When the U.S. real exchange rate appreciates, U.S. goods
become more expensive relative to foreign goods, making U.S. goods less attractive
to consumers at home and abroad. As a result, exports from the United States fall,
and imports into the United States rise. Both changes reduce net exports. Hence,
an appreciation of the real exchange rate reduces the quantity of dollars demanded
in the market for foreign-currency exchange.
Figure 2 shows supply and demand in the market for foreign-currency exchange.
The demand curve slopes downward for the reason just discussed: A higher real
exchange rate makes U.S. goods more expensive and reduces the quantity of dollars
demanded to buy those goods. The supply curve is vertical because the quantity of
dollars supplied for net capital outflow does not depend on the real exchange rate.
(As discussed earlier, net capital outflow depends on the real interest rate. When
considering the market for foreign-currency exchange, the real interest rate and net
capital outflow are given.)

Figure 2
The Market for Foreign-Currency
Exchange

The real exchange rate is determined by the supply and demand for foreign-currency
exchange. The supply of dollars to be exchanged into foreign currency comes from net
capital outflow. Because net capital outflow does not depend on the real exchange rate,
the supply curve is vertical. The demand for dollars comes from net exports. Because
a lower real exchange rate stimulates net exports (and increases the quantity of dollars
demanded to pay for these net exports), the demand curve slopes downward. At the
equilibrium real exchange rate, the number of dollars supplied to buy foreign assets
exactly balances the number of dollars demanded to buy net exports.

Real
Exchange
Rate

Supply of dollars
(from net capital outflow)

Equilibrium
real exchange
rate
Demand for dollars
(for net exports)

Equilibrium
quantity

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 691

Quantity of Dollars Exchanged
into Foreign Currency

13/09/22 6:46 PM

692

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

It might seem strange that, in this model, net capital outflow does not depend
on the exchange rate. After all, a higher exchange value of the U.S. dollar not
only makes foreign goods less expensive for American buyers but also makes
foreign assets less expensive. A stronger dollar would make foreign assets more
attractive, or so it might seem. But that is not necessarily the case. An American
investor will eventually want to turn the foreign asset, as well as any profits
earned on it, back into dollars. For example, an increase in the value of the dollar
makes it less expensive for an American to buy stock in a Japanese company. But
any dividends that the stock pays will be in yen. As these yen are exchanged for
dollars, the higher value of the dollar means that the dividends will buy fewer
dollars than before. Changes in the exchange rate influence not only the cost of
buying foreign assets but also the benefit of owning them, and these two effects
offset each other. For this reason, our model of the open economy posits that net
capital outflow does not depend on the real exchange rate, as represented by the
vertical supply curve in Figure 2.
The real exchange rate moves to ensure equilibrium in this market. It adjusts to
balance the supply and demand for dollars just as the price of any good adjusts
to balance supply and demand for it. If the real exchange rate were below the
equilibrium level, the quantity of dollars supplied would be less than the quantity
demanded. The resulting shortage of dollars would push the value of the dollar
upward. Conversely, if the real exchange rate were above the equilibrium level, the
quantity of dollars supplied would exceed the quantity demanded. The surplus of
dollars would drive the value of the dollar downward. At the equilibrium real
exchange rate, the demand for dollars by foreigners arising from the U.S. net
exports of goods and services balances the supply of dollars from Americans
arising from U.S. net capital outflow.

Purchasing-Power Parity as a Special Case

A

n alert reader of this book might ask: Why are we developing a theory
of the exchange rate here? Didn’t we already do that in the preceding
chapter?
Well, yes, we discussed a theory of the exchange rate called purchasingpower parity. It asserts that, because of international arbitrage, a dollar (or
any other currency) must buy the same quantity of goods and services in
every country. As a result, the real exchange rate is fixed, and all changes
in the nominal exchange rate between two currencies reflect changes in
the price levels in the two countries.
The model of the exchange rate developed here is related to the theory
of purchasing-power parity. According to purchasing-power parity, international trade responds quickly to international price differences. If goods
were cheaper in one country than in another, they would be exported
from the first country and imported into the second until the price difference disappeared. In other words, the theory of purchasing-power parity

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 692

assumes that net exports are highly responsive to small changes in the
real exchange rate. If net exports were, in fact, so responsive, the demand
curve in Figure 2 would be horizontal.
Thus, the theory of purchasing-power parity can be viewed as a special
case of the model considered here. In that special case, the demand curve
for foreign-currency exchange, instead of sloping downward, is horizontal
at the level of the real exchange rate that ensures parity of purchasing
power at home and abroad.
This special case is a good starting point for explaining exchange rates,
but it’s not the last word. In practice, because of transport costs and the
imperfect substitutability of foreign and domestic goods, purchasingpower parity sometimes fails to hold. This chapter, therefore, assumes
that the demand curve for foreign-currency exchange slopes downward.
This assumption allows for the possibility that the real exchange rate
changes over time as, in fact, it does in the real world. ■

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 33 A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy

693

QuickQuiz
1. Holding other things constant, an increase in a
nation’s interest rate reduces
a. national saving and domestic investment.
b. national saving and the net capital outflow.
c. domestic investment and the net capital outflow.
d. national saving only.

2. Holding other things constant, an appreciation of a
nation’s currency causes
a. exports to rise and imports to fall.
b. exports to fall and imports to rise.
c. both exports and imports to rise.
d. both exports and imports to fall.
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

33-2 Equilibrium in the Open Economy
So far, we have discussed supply and demand in the market for loanable funds
and in the market for foreign-currency exchange. Let’s now consider how these
markets are connected.

33-2a Net Capital Outflow: The Link between the Two Markets
We begin by recapping what we’ve learned so far in this chapter. We have been
discussing how the economy coordinates four important macroeconomic variables:
national saving (S), domestic investment (I), net capital outflow (NCO), and net
exports (NX). These are related through the following identities:
S 5 I 1 NCO

and
NCO 5 NX .

In the market for loanable funds, supply comes from national saving (S), demand
comes from domestic investment (I) and net capital outflow (NCO), and the real interest rate balances supply and demand. In the market for foreign-currency exchange,
supply comes from net capital outflow (NCO), demand comes from net exports
(NX), and the real exchange rate balances supply and demand.
Net capital outflow is the variable that links the two markets. In the market for
loanable funds, net capital outflow is part of demand. An American who wants
to buy an asset abroad must finance this purchase by obtaining resources in the
U.S. market for loanable funds. In the market for foreign-currency exchange,
net capital outflow is the source of supply. An American who wants to buy an
asset in another country must supply dollars to exchange them for the currency
of that country.
The key determinant of net capital outflow, as we have discussed, is the real
interest rate. An increase in the U.S. interest rate makes U.S. assets more attractive
and lowers the U.S. net capital outflow. Figure 3 shows this negative relationship
between the interest rate and net capital outflow. This net-capital-outflow curve is
the link between the market for loanable funds and the market for foreign-currency
exchange.

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 693

13/09/22 6:46 PM

694

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

Figure 3
How Net Capital Outflow Depends on the
Interest Rate

Real
Interest
Rate

Because a higher domestic real
interest rate makes domestic assets
more attractive, it reduces net capital
outflow. Note the position of zero on the
horizontal axis: Net capital outflow can
be positive or negative. A negative value
of net capital outflow means that the
economy has a net inflow of capital.

Net capital outflow
is negative.

0

Net capital outflow
is positive.

Net Capital
Outflow

33-2b Simultaneous Equilibrium in Two Markets
Figure 4 puts all the pieces of our model together. It shows how the market for
loanable funds and the market for foreign-currency exchange jointly determine the
important macroeconomic variables of an open economy.
Panel (a) of the figure shows the market for loanable funds (taken from Figure 1).
As before, national saving is the source of the supply of loanable funds. Domestic
investment and net capital outflow are the sources of the demand for loanable
funds. The equilibrium real interest rate (r1) brings the quantity of loanable funds
supplied and demanded into balance.
Panel (b) of the figure shows net capital outflow (taken from Figure 3). The interest rate comes from panel (a) and determines net capital outflow. A higher interest
rate at home makes domestic assets more attractive, reducing net capital outflow.
Therefore, the net-capital-outflow curve in panel (b) slopes downward.
Panel (c) of the figure shows the market for foreign-currency exchange (taken
from Figure 2). Because foreign assets must be purchased with foreign currency,
the quantity of net capital outflow from panel (b) determines the supply of dollars
to be exchanged into foreign currencies. The real exchange rate does not affect
net capital outflow, so the supply curve is vertical. The demand for dollars comes
from net exports. Because a depreciation of the real exchange rate increases net
exports, the demand curve for foreign-currency exchange slopes downward. The
equilibrium real exchange rate (E1) brings into balance the quantity of dollars
supplied and the quantity of dollars demanded in the market for foreign-currency
exchange.
The two markets shown in Figure 4 determine two relative prices: the real
interest rate and the real exchange rate. The real interest rate determined in
panel (a) is the price of goods and services in the present relative to goods and

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 694

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 33 A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy

Figure 4
The Real Equilibrium in an
Open Economy

In panel (a), the supply and demand for loanable funds determine the real interest
rate. In panel (b), the interest rate determines net capital outflow, which provides the
supply of dollars in the market for foreign-currency exchange. In panel (c), the supply
and demand for dollars in the market for foreign-currency exchange determine the real
exchange rate.

(a) The Market for Loanable Funds
Real
Interest
Rate

695

(b) Net Capital Outflow
Real
Interest
Rate

Supply

r1

r1

Demand

Net capital
outflow, NCO

Quantity of
Loanable Funds

Net Capital
Outflow

Real
Exchange
Rate

Supply

E1

Demand
Quantity of
Dollars
(c) The Market for Foreign-Currency Exchange

services in the future. The real exchange rate determined in panel (c) is the
price of domestic goods and services relative to foreign goods and services.
These two relative prices adjust simultaneously to balance supply and demand
in these two markets. As they do so, they determine national saving, domestic
investment, net capital outflow, and net exports. We can use this model to see
how all these variables change when some policy or event causes one of these
curves to shift.

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 695

13/09/22 6:46 PM

696

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

Disentangling Supply and Demand

S

uppose the owners of an apple orchard decide to consume some of their
own apples. Does this decision represent an increase in the demand
for apples or a decrease in the supply? Either answer is defensible, and
if we are careful in our subsequent analysis, nothing important will hinge
on the answer we choose. Sometimes how we divide things between supply
and demand is a bit arbitrary.
In the macroeconomic model of the open economy developed in this
chapter, the division of transactions between “supply” and “demand” is
also a bit arbitrary—both in the market for loanable funds and in the
market for foreign-currency exchange.
Consider first the market for loanable funds. The model treats the net
capital outflow as part of the demand for loanable funds. Yet instead of
writing S 5 I 1 NCO, we could just as easily have written S 2 NCO 5
I. When the equation is rewritten in this way, a capital outflow looks like
a reduction in the supply of loanable funds. Either way works. The first
interpretation (S 5 I 1 NCO) emphasizes loanable funds generated

domestically, whether used at home or abroad. The second interpretation
(S 2 NCO 5 I) emphasizes loanable funds available for domestic
investment, whether generated at home or abroad. The difference is more
semantic than substantive.
Similarly, consider the market for foreign-currency exchange. In our
model, net exports are the source of the demand for dollars, and net
capital outflow is the source of the supply. When a U.S. resident imports
a car made in Japan, our model treats that transaction as a decrease
in the quantity of dollars demanded (because net exports fall) rather
than an increase in the quantity of dollars supplied. Similarly, when a
Japanese citizen buys a U.S. government bond, our model treats that
transaction as a decrease in the quantity of dollars supplied (because
net capital outflow falls) rather than an increase in the quantity of dollars demanded. This definition of terms may seem somewhat unnatural
at first, but it will prove useful when analyzing the effects of various
policies. ■

QuickQuiz
3. In the model just developed, two markets determine
two prices, which are
a. the nominal exchange rate and the nominal interest rate.
b. the nominal exchange rate and the real interest
rate.
c. the real exchange rate and the nominal interest
rate.
d. the real exchange rate and the real interest rate.

4. Other things being equal, an increase in the U.S. net
capital outflow ________ the demand for loanable
funds and ________ the supply of dollars in the market for foreign currency exchange.
a. increases; increases
b. increases; decreases
c. decreases; increases
d. decreases; decreases
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

33-3 How Policies and Events Affect an Open Economy
Let’s now use this model of the open economy to analyze how changes in policy
and other events alter the economy’s equilibrium. Keep in mind that this model
is just supply and demand in two markets: the market for loanable funds and the
market for foreign-currency exchange. When using the model to analyze any event,
apply the three steps introduced in Chapter 4. First, determine which of the supply
and demand curves the event affects. Second, determine the direction in which
the curves shift. Third, use the supply-and-demand diagrams to compare the old
equilibrium with the new one.

33-3a Government Budget Deficits
Earlier in this book, when we applied the loanable-funds model to a closed economy, we examined the effects of government budget deficits, which occur when
government spending exceeds government revenue. Because a government budget

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 696

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 33 A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy

697

deficit represents negative public saving, it reduces national saving (the sum
of public and private saving). We concluded that a government budget deficit
reduces the supply of loanable funds, drives up the interest rate, and crowds out
investment.
Now let’s consider the effects of a budget deficit in an open economy. First,
which curve in our model shifts? As in a closed economy, the initial impact of the
budget deficit is on national saving and, therefore, on the supply curve for loanable funds. Second, in which direction does this supply curve shift? Again, as in a
closed economy, a budget deficit represents negative public saving, so it reduces
national saving and shifts the supply curve for loanable funds to the left. This result
is shown as the shift from S1 to S2 in panel (a) of Figure 5.
Finally, compare the old and new equilibria. Panel (a) shows the effect of a budget deficit on the market for loanable funds. Because fewer funds are available for
borrowers in financial markets, the interest rate rises from r1 to r2 to balance supply and demand. Faced with a higher interest rate, borrowers choose to borrow
less. In other words, the quantity of loanable funds demanded falls. This change
is represented in the figure as the movement along the demand curve from point
A to point B. With reduced borrowing comes a decline in the purchase of capital
goods by households and firms. As in a closed economy, the budget deficit crowds
out domestic investment.
In an open economy, however, the reduced supply of loanable funds has additional effects. Panel (b) shows that the increase in the interest rate from r1 to r2 reduces
net capital outflow. [This fall in net capital outflow is also part of the decrease in the
quantity of loanable funds demanded in the movement from point A to point B in
panel (a).] Because savings kept at home now earn higher rates of return, investing
abroad is less attractive, and domestic residents buy fewer foreign assets. Higher
interest rates also attract foreign investors who want to earn the higher returns on
U.S. assets. Thus, when the budget deficit increases the interest rate, both domestic
and foreign behavior cause net capital outflow to decline.
Panel (c) shows how the budget deficit affects the market for foreign-currency
exchange. Because net capital outflow is reduced, domestic residents need less foreign currency to buy foreign assets and, therefore, supply fewer dollars in the market
for foreign-currency exchange. The supply curve for dollars shifts leftward from S1
to S2. The reduced supply of dollars causes the real exchange rate to appreciate from
E1 to E2. That is, the dollar becomes more valuable relative to foreign currencies.
This appreciation, in turn, makes domestic goods more expensive compared with
foreign goods. People both at home and abroad respond to this change in relative
prices, so exports fall and imports rise. For both reasons, net exports fall.
To sum up: In an open economy, government budget deficits raise real interest
rates, crowd out domestic investment, cause the currency to appreciate, and push
the trade balance toward deficit.
An example of this lesson occurred in the United States in the 1980s. Shortly
after Ronald Reagan was elected president in 1980, the fiscal policy of the U.S.
federal government radically changed. The president and Congress enacted
large tax cuts but did not reduce government spending by nearly as much. The
result was a large budget deficit. Our model of the open economy predicts that
such a policy should have led to a trade deficit, and, in fact, it did, as we saw
in a case study in the preceding chapter. Because the budget deficit and trade
deficit during this period were so closely related in both theory and practice, they
were nicknamed the twin deficits. It would be a mistake to view these twins as
identical, however, because many factors beyond fiscal policy can influence the
trade deficit.

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 697

13/09/22 6:46 PM

698

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

When the government runs a budget deficit, it reduces the supply of loanable funds
from S1 to S2 in panel (a). The interest rate rises from r1 to r2 to balance the supply and
demand for loanable funds. In panel (b), the higher interest rate reduces net capital
outflow. That reduced net capital outflow, in turn, reduces the supply of dollars in the
market for foreign-currency exchange from S1 to S2 in panel (c). The fall in the supply of
dollars causes the real exchange rate to appreciate from E1 to E2. The appreciation of the
exchange rate pushes the trade balance toward deficit.

Figure 5
The Effects of a Government
Budget Deficit

1. A budget deficit reduces the supply
of loanable funds . . .

(a) The Market for Loanable Funds
Real
Interest
Rate
r2
r1
2. . . . which
increases the
real interest
rate . . .

S2

(b) Net Capital Outflow

Real
Interest
Rate

S1

B

r2
A

r1
3. . . . which in
turn reduces net
capital outflow.

Demand

NCO
Quantity of
Loanable Funds

Net Capital
Outflow

Real
Exchange
Rate

E2
5. . . . which
causes the
real exchange
rate to
appreciate.

S2

S1

4. The decrease in net
capital outflow reduces
the supply of dollars to
be exchanged into
foreign currency . . .

E1

Demand
Quantity of
Dollars
(c) The Market for Foreign-Currency Exchange

trade policy
government policy that
directly influences the
quantity of goods and
services that a country
imports or exports

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 698

33-3b Trade Policy
Trade policy is government policy that directly influences the quantity of goods
and services that a country imports or exports. Trade policy takes various forms,
usually with the purpose of supporting a particular domestic industry. One common trade policy is a tariff, a tax on imported goods. Another is an import quota,
a limit on the quantity of a good produced abroad that can be sold domestically.

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 33 A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy

699

Consider the macroeconomic impact of trade policy. Suppose
that the U.S. steel industry, concerned about competition from
Ask the
European producers, convinces the U.S. government to impose a
Experts
quota on the amount of steel that can be imported from Europe.
In making their case, lobbyists for the steel industry assert that
“If the United States reduced its fiscal deficit, then its trade
the trade restriction would shrink the size of the U.S. trade
deficit would also shrink.”
deficit. Are they right? Our model, illustrated in Figure 6, offers
an answer.
What do economists say?
The first step in analyzing the trade policy is to determine
37%
6%
which curve shifts. The initial impact of the import restriction is,
uncertain
disagree
not surprisingly, on imports. Because net exports equal exports
minus imports, the policy also affects net exports. And because
57%
net exports are the source of demand for dollars in the market
agree
for foreign-currency exchange, the policy affects the demand
curve in this market.
Source: IGM Economic Experts Panel, June 21, 2017.
The second step is to determine the direction in which this
demand curve shifts. Because the quota restricts the amount
of European steel sold in the United States, it reduces imports at any given real
exchange rate. Net exports, which equal exports minus imports, will therefore rise
for any given real exchange rate. Because foreigners need dollars to buy U.S. net
exports, the rise in net exports increases the demand for dollars in the market for
foreign-currency exchange. This increase in the demand for dollars is shown in
panel (c) of Figure 6 as the shift from D1 to D2.
The third step is to compare the old and new equilibria. As we can see in
panel (c), the increase in the demand for dollars causes the real exchange rate
to appreciate from E1 to E2. Because nothing has happened in the market for
loanable funds in panel (a), the real interest rate remains the same. Because
there is no change in the real interest rate, there is also no change in net capital
outflow, shown in panel (b). And because there is no change in net capital outflow, there can be no change in net exports, even though the import quota has
reduced imports.
It might seem puzzling that net exports stay the same while imports fall. This
puzzle is resolved by noting the change in the real exchange rate: When the dollar
appreciates in the market for foreign-currency exchange, domestic goods become
more expensive compared with foreign goods. This appreciation encourages imports
and discourages exports, and both changes offset the direct increase in net exports
due to the import quota. In the end, an import quota reduces both imports and
exports, but net exports (exports minus imports) are unchanged.
We have thus arrived at a surprising result: Trade policies do not affect the trade
balance. That is, policies that directly influence exports or imports do not alter net
exports. This conclusion seems less surprising if one recalls the accounting identity:

Deficits

NX 5 NCO 5 S 2 I .

Net exports equal net capital outflow, which equals national saving minus domestic
investment. Trade policies do not alter the trade balance because they do not alter
national saving or domestic investment. For given levels of national saving and
domestic investment, the real exchange rate adjusts to keep the trade balance the
same, regardless of the trade policies the government puts in place.
Although trade policies do not affect a country’s overall trade balance, they affect
specific firms, industries, and countries. When the U.S. government imposes an

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 699

13/09/22 6:46 PM

700

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

Figure 6
The Effects of an Import Quota

When the U.S. government imposes a quota on the import of European steel, nothing
happens in the market for loanable funds in panel (a) or to net capital outflow in panel (b).
The only effect is a rise in net exports (exports minus imports) for any given real exchange
rate. As a result, the demand for dollars in the market for foreign-currency exchange rises, as
shown by the shift from D1 to D2 in panel (c). This increase in the demand for dollars causes
the value of the dollar to appreciate from E1 to E2. This appreciation of the dollar tends to
reduce net exports, offsetting the direct effect of the import quota on the trade balance.

(a) The Market for Loanable Funds
Real
Interest
Rate

(b) Net Capital Outflow
Real
Interest
Rate

Supply

r1

r1
3. Net exports,
however, remain
the same.

Demand

NCO
Quantity of
Loanable Funds

Net Capital
Outflow

Real
Exchange
Rate

E2
2. . . . and
causes the
real exchange
rate to
appreciate.

Supply
1. An import
quota increases
the demand for
dollars . . .

E1
D2
D1
Quantity of
Dollars
(c) The Market for Foreign-Currency Exchange

import quota on European steel, the U.S. Steel Corporation faces less competition
from abroad and will likely sell more steel and make greater profits. At the same
time, because the dollar has appreciated, U.S. farmers find their products more
expensive on world markets and will sell less of them to, say, China. In this case,
the import quota on European steel increases net exports of steel and decreases net
exports of agricultural products. In addition, it pushes the trade balance between

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 700

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 33 A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy

701

the United States and Europe toward surplus, and it pushes the trade balance
between the United States and China toward deficit. The overall trade balance of
the U.S. economy, however, stays the same.
The effects of trade policies are, therefore, more microeconomic than macroeconomic. Although advocates of trade policies sometimes suggest (contrary to what
our model predicts) that these policies can alter a country’s trade balance, they are
usually more motivated by concerns about specific firms or industries. One should
not be surprised, for instance, to hear an executive from U.S. Steel advocating import
quotas on steel from Europe. But economists usually oppose such trade policies.
Free trade may hurt some workers and firms, but it allows economies to specialize
in doing what they do best, increasing prosperity in all countries. Trade restrictions
interfere with these gains from trade.

33-3c Political Instability and Capital Flight
In 1994, political instability in Mexico, including the assassination of a prominent political leader, made world financial markets nervous. The nation suddenly seemed like a
riskier place to invest. People decided to pull some of their assets out of Mexico and
move these funds to the United States and other “safe havens.” Such a large and sudden movement of funds out of a country is called capital flight. To see the implications
of capital flight for the Mexican economy, let’s follow our three steps for analyzing a
change in equilibrium. But this time, we apply our model from the Mexican perspective.
Consider first which curves are affected by capital flight. When investors around
the world observe political problems in Mexico, they decide to sell some of their
Mexican assets and use the proceeds to buy U.S. assets. This increases Mexican net
capital outflow and, therefore, affects both markets in our model. Most obviously,
it affects the net-capital-outflow curve, and this change in net capital outflow, in
turn, influences the supply of pesos in the market for foreign-currency exchange.
In addition, because the demand for loanable funds comes from both domestic
investment and net capital outflow, capital flight affects the demand curve in the
Mexican market for loanable funds.
Now consider the direction in which these curves shift. When net capital outflow
increases, there is greater demand for loanable funds to finance these purchases of
capital assets abroad. As panel (a) of Figure 7 shows, the demand curve for loanable funds shifts to the right from D1 to D2. In addition, because net capital outflow
is higher for any interest rate, the net-capital-outflow curve also shifts to the right
from NCO1 to NCO2, as in panel (b).
To see the effects of capital flight on the Mexican economy, compare the old
and new equilibria. Panel (a) of Figure 7 shows that the increased demand for
loanable funds causes the interest rate in Mexico to rise from r1 to r2. Panel (b)
shows that Mexican net capital outflow increases. (The rise in the interest rate
makes Mexican assets more attractive, but this change only partly offsets the
impact of capital flight on net capital outflow.) Panel (c) shows that the increase
in net capital outflow raises the supply of pesos in the market for foreign-currency
exchange from S1 to S2. That is, as people try to get out of Mexican assets, there
is a large supply of pesos to be converted into dollars. This increase in supply
causes the peso to depreciate from E1 to E2. Thus, capital flight from Mexico
increases Mexican interest rates and decreases the value of the Mexican peso
in the market for foreign-currency exchange. This is exactly what happened in
1994. From November 1994 to March 1995, the interest rate on short-term Mexican
government bonds rose from 14 percent to 70 percent, and the peso depreciated
from 29 to 15 U.S. cents per peso.

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 701

capital flight
a large and sudden
reduction in the demand
for assets located in a
country

13/09/22 6:46 PM

702

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

Figure 7
The Effects of Capital Flight

If people decide that Mexico is a risky place to keep their savings, they will move their
funds to safe havens such as the United States, resulting in an increase in Mexican net
capital outflow. Consequently, the demand for loanable funds in Mexico rises from D1 to
D2, as shown in panel (a), driving up the Mexican real interest rate from r1 to r2. Because
net capital outflow is higher for any interest rate, that curve also shifts to the right from
NCO1 to NCO2 in panel (b). At the same time, in the market for foreign-currency exchange,
the supply of pesos rises from S1 to S2, as shown in panel (c). This increase in the supply
of pesos causes the peso to depreciate from E1 to E2, so the peso becomes less valuable
relative to other currencies.

(a) The Market for Loanable Funds in Mexico
Real
Interest
Rate

(b) Mexican Net Capital Outflow
Real
Interest
Rate

Supply

r2

r2

r1

r1

1. An increase
in net capital
outflow . . .

D2

3. . . . which
increases
the interest
rate.

D1
2. . . . increases the demand for
loanable funds . . .

NCO1

Quantity of
Loanable Funds

NCO2
Net Capital
Outflow

Real
Exchange
Rate

E1
5. . . . which
causes the
peso to
depreciate.

E2

S1

S2
4. At the same
time, the increase
in net capital
outflow
increases the
supply of pesos . . .

Demand

Quantity of
Pesos
(c) The Market for Foreign-Currency Exchange

The price changes that result from capital flight influence key macroeconomic
quantities. The depreciation of the currency makes exports cheaper and imports
more expensive, pushing the trade balance toward surplus. At the same time, the
increase in the interest rate reduces domestic investment, slowing capital accumulation and economic growth.

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 702

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 33 A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy

703

Capital flight has its largest impact on the country from which capital is fleeing,
but it also affects other countries. When capital flows out of Mexico into the United
States, for instance, it has the opposite effect on the U.S. economy as it has on the
Mexican economy. In particular, the rise in Mexican net capital outflow coincides
with a fall in U.S. net capital outflow. As the peso depreciates and Mexican interest rates rise, the dollar appreciates, and U.S. interest rates fall. The impact on the
U.S. economy is small, however, because the economy of the United States is much
larger than that of Mexico.
The events that we have been describing in Mexico could happen to any
economy, and, in fact, they do from time to time. In 1997, the world learned
that the banking systems of several Asian economies, including Thailand, South
Korea, and Indonesia, were at or near the point of bankruptcy, and this news
induced capital to flee from these nations. In 1998, the Russian government
defaulted on its debt, prompting international investors to take whatever money
they could and run. A similar (but more complicated) set of events unfolded in
Argentina in 2002 and again in 2019 and 2020. In each of these cases of capital
flight, the results were much as our model predicts: rising interest rates and a
depreciating currency.

Case
Study

Capital Flows from China

According to our analysis of capital flight, a nation that experiences
an outflow of capital sees its currency weaken in foreign exchange
markets, and this depreciation, in turn, increases its net exports. The
country into which the capital is flowing sees its currency strengthen, and this
appreciation pushes its trade balance toward deficit.
With these lessons in mind, consider this question: Suppose a nation’s government, as a matter of policy, encourages capital to flow to another country,
perhaps by making foreign investments itself. What effects would this policy
have? The answer is much the same: Other things being equal, it leads to a
weaker currency and a trade surplus for the nation encouraging the capital
outflows and a stronger currency and a trade deficit for the recipient of those
capital flows.
This analysis sheds light on a long-running policy dispute between the United
States and China. The Chinese government has, at times, tried to depress the
value of its currency, the renminbi, in foreign exchange markets to promote its
export industries. It did this by accumulating foreign assets, including substantial
amounts of U.S. government bonds. From 2000 to 2014, China’s total reserves of
foreign assets rose from $160 billion to about $4 trillion.
The U.S. government often objected to China’s interventions in foreign
exchange markets. By holding down the value of the renminbi, the policy made
Chinese goods less expensive compared with American goods, pushing the
U.S. trade balance toward deficit and hurting American producers who competed with imports from China. Because of these effects, the U.S. government
tried to get China to stop influencing the exchange value of its currency using
government-sponsored capital flows. Some members of Congress advocated
tariffs on Chinese imports unless China ceased its “currency manipulation.”
And during the Trump administration, the government enacted tariffs, sometimes citing this argument.
Yet the impact of the Chinese policy on the U.S. economy was not all
bad. American consumers of Chinese imports benefited from lower prices.

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 703

13/09/22 6:46 PM

704

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

In the
News

Separating Fact from Fiction

Politicians on both the right and left
often hold mistaken views about the
role of international trade in a nation’s
economic well-being.

Five Big Truths about Trade
By Alan S. Blinder

I

nternational trade is, once again, a hot-button
political issue, making this an unpropitious
time for rational discourse about the subject.
Nonetheless, here are five issues on which the
overwhelming majority of economists, liberal
and conservative, agree.
1. Most job losses are not due to
international trade. Every month roughly
five million new jobs are created in the U.S.
and almost that many are destroyed, leaving
a small net increment. International trade
accounts for only a minor share of that staggering job churn. Vastly more derives from the
hurly-burly of competition and from technologi-

Ask the
Experts

cal change, which literally creates and destroys
entire industries. Competition and technology
are widely and correctly applauded—international trade is not so fortunate.
2. Trade is more about efficiency—
and hence wages—than about the number of jobs. You probably don’t sew your own
clothes or grow your own food. Instead, you buy
these things from others, using the wages you
earn doing something you do better. Imagine
how much lower your standard of living would
be if you had to sew your own clothes, grow
your own food . . . and a thousand other things.
The case for international trade is no different. It’s not mainly about creating or destroying
jobs. It’s about using labor more efficiently,
which is one key to higher wages.
But there is a catch: Whenever trade patterns change, some people will gain (either
jobs or wages) but others will lose. The federal government could and should help them
more, but it doesn’t. So Americans who do lose
their jobs due to international trade have a
legitimate gripe.

Currency
Manipulation

“Economic analysis can identify whether countries are using
their exchange rates to benefit their own people at the expense
of their trading partners’ welfare.”
What do economists say?
34%
disagree
30%
agree

36%
uncertain

Source: IGM Economic Experts Panel, June 16, 2015.

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 704

3. Bilateral trade imbalances are
inevitable and mostly uninteresting.
Each month I run a trade deficit with Public
Service Electric & Gas. They sell me gas and
electricity; I sell them nothing. But I run a bilateral trade surplus with Princeton University, to
which I sell teaching services but from which
I buy little. Should I seek balanced trade with
PSE&G or Princeton? Of course not. Neither
should countries.
4. Running an overall trade deficit
does not make us “losers.” The U.S. multilateral trade balance—its balance with all of
its trading partners—has been in deficit for
decades. Does that mean that our country is in
some sort of trouble? Probably not. For example,
people who claim that our trade deficit kills
jobs need to explain how the U.S. managed to
achieve 4% unemployment in 2000, when our
trade deficit was larger, as a share of GDP,
than it is today.
A trade deficit means that foreigners send
us more goods and services than we send them.
To balance the books, they get our IOUs, which

In addition, the inflow of capital from China reduced U.S.
interest rates, increasing investment in the U.S. economy.
To some extent, the Chinese government was financing U.S.
economic growth. The Chinese policy of investing in the U.S.
economy created winners and losers among Americans. All
things considered, the net impact on the U.S. economy was
probably small.
The harder question concerns the motives behind the policy:
Why were Chinese leaders during these years interested in producing for export and investing abroad rather than producing
for domestic consumption and investment? One possibility is
that China wanted to accumulate a reserve of foreign assets on
which it could draw in emergencies—a kind of national “rainyday fund.” In any case, after 2014, as growth in the Chinese
economy slowed, the Chinese government started to spend some
of the fund. From 2014 to 2021, its reserves of foreign assets fell
by almost $1 trillion. ●

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 33 A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy

means they wind up holding paper—U.S.
Treasury bills, corporate bonds or other private
debt instruments. That doesn’t sound so terrible
for us, does it?
One exceptional country—the U.S.—is
the source of the world’s major international
reserve currency, the U.S. dollar. Since everexpanding world commerce requires ever more
dollars, the U.S. must run trade deficits regularly. That’s sometimes called our “exorbitant
privilege,” since we get to import more than
we export.
5. Trade agreements barely affect a
nation’s trade balance. Much of the political
angst is directed not at trade in general, but
at specific international trade agreements. The
North American Free Trade Agreement allegedly
shipped U.S. jobs to Mexico. . . .
There is a grain of truth here. Some U.S.
jobs were indeed destroyed when NAFTA liberalized trade with Mexico—and those people
deserved better treatment from the government
than they got. But NAFTA also created a number
of new jobs in the U.S. (See No. 2.)
But there’s more. “Trade” and “trade agreements” are not synonyms. We traded with
Mexico long before NAFTA, and that trade was

growing. Our trade with China has burgeoned
in recent decades without a succession of trade
agreements.
Most fundamentally, but least understood,
a nation’s overall trade balance is determined
by its domestic decisions, not by trade deals.
Think about the accounting involved here.
As noted above, borrowing from abroad
is the bookkeeping counterpart of running
a trade deficit. One implies the other. The
amount we borrow from abroad must equal
the gap between our total spending as a
nation (including government spending) and
our total income (including the government’s
income from taxation). Spendthrift nations
like the U.S. have trade deficits because we
don’t save much. But these saving decisions
are domestic; they do not derive from trade
agreements.
America’s chronic trade deficits stem
from the dollar’s international role and from
Americans’ decisions not to save much, not
from trade deals. Trade deficits are not a major
cause of either job losses or job gains. But
some people do lose their jobs from shifting
trade patterns; and the government should do
more to help them. Importantly, trade makes

705

American workers more productive and, presumably, better paid.
Now, would someone please tell this to
Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump? ■

Questions to Discuss
1.

Do you think running a trade deficit
necessarily puts a nation at a disadvantage? Why or why not? According to
the dictionary, the word deficit means
“an excess of expenditure over revenue,”
but another definition is “deficiency or
disadvantage.” Might this dual meaning
mislead pundits and policymakers into
being more worried about trade deficits
than Professor Blinder is?

2.

How do you think the government should
help workers who lose their jobs because
of changing patterns of trade? Should
these workers receive government assistance different from that given to workers who lose jobs for other reasons, such
as changing technology?

Mr. Blinder is a professor of economics at
Princeton University.

Source: The Wall Street Journal, April 22, 2016.

QuickQuiz
5. The government in an open economy cuts spending
to reduce the budget deficit. As a result, the interest
rate ________, leading to a capital ________ and a
currency ________.
a. falls; outflow; appreciation
b. falls; outflow; depreciation
c. falls; inflow; appreciation
d. rises; inflow; appreciation

7. A civil war abroad causes foreign investors to
move their funds to the safe haven of the United
States, leading to ________U.S. interest rates and a
________ U.S. dollar.
a. higher; weaker
b. higher; stronger
c. lower; weaker
d. lower; stronger

6. The nation of Elbonia has long banned the export of its
highly prized puka shells. A newly elected president,
however, removes the export ban. This change in policy
causes the nation’s currency to ________, making the
goods Elbonia imports ________ expensive.
a. depreciate; less
b. depreciate; more
c. appreciate; less
d. appreciate; more

8. If business leaders in Great Britain become more
confident in their economy, they will increase investment, causing the British pound to ________ and
pushing the British trade balance toward ________.
a. appreciate; deficit
b. appreciate; surplus
c. depreciate; deficit
d. depreciate; surplus
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 705

13/09/22 6:46 PM

706

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

33-4 Conclusion
International economics is a topic of increasing importance. In many nations, people
buy large quantities of goods from abroad, and much of what they produce is sold
overseas. Through mutual funds and other financial institutions, people borrow and
lend in world financial markets. As a result, a full analysis of a modern economy
requires an understanding of how it interacts with others around the world. This
chapter has provided a basic model for thinking about the macroeconomics of open
economies.
The study of international economics is valuable, but we should be careful not
to exaggerate its importance. In the United States and many other countries, policymakers and commentators are often quick to blame foreigners for economic
problems. By contrast, economists typically view most problems as homegrown.
For example, politicians are prone to see foreign competition as a threat to national
living standards, while economists are more likely to lament excessive budget
deficits and insufficient national saving. Low saving impedes growth in capital,
productivity, and living standards, regardless of whether the economy is open or
closed. Foreigners are a convenient target for politicians because blaming foreigners
is a way to avoid responsibility without insulting any domestic constituency. When
you hear popular discussions of international trade and finance, it is important to
distinguish myth from reality. The tools you have learned in this chapter and previous ones should help in that endeavor.

Chapter in a Nutshell
• Two markets are central to the macroeconomics of
open economies: the market for loanable funds and the
market for foreign-currency exchange. In the market
for loanable funds, the real interest rate adjusts to balance the supply of loanable funds (from national saving) and the demand for loanable funds (for domestic
investment and net capital outflow). In the market
for foreign-currency exchange, the real exchange rate
adjusts to balance the supply of dollars (from net
capital outflow) and the demand for dollars (for net
exports). Because net capital outflow contributes to the
demand for loanable funds and also provides the supply of dollars for foreign-currency exchange, it is the
variable that connects these two markets.
• A policy that reduces national saving, such as a
government budget deficit, reduces the supply of
loanable funds and drives up the interest rate. The
higher interest rate causes the net capital outflow to

decline, reducing the supply of dollars in the market
for foreign-currency exchange. The dollar appreciates,
and net exports fall.
• Although restrictive trade policies, such as tariffs or
quotas on imports, are sometimes advocated as a way
to alter the trade balance, they do not necessarily have
that effect. A trade restriction increases net exports for
any given exchange rate and, therefore, increases the
demand for dollars in the market for foreign-currency
exchange. As a result, the dollar appreciates, making
domestic goods more expensive relative to foreign
goods. This appreciation offsets the initial impact of the
trade restriction on net exports.
• When investors change their attitudes about holding
assets of a country, the ramifications for the country’s
economy can be profound. In particular, political instability can lead to capital flight, which tends to increase
interest rates and cause the currency to depreciate.

Key Concepts
trade policy, p. 698

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 706

capital flight, p. 701

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 33 A Macroeconomic Theory of the Open Economy

707

Questions for Review
1. Describe supply and demand in the market for
loanable funds and in the market for foreign-currency
exchange. How are these markets linked?

would this policy do to the trade balance and the
real exchange rate? What is the impact on the textile
industry? What is the impact on the auto industry?

2. Why are budget deficits and trade deficits sometimes
called the twin deficits?

4. What is capital flight? When a country experiences
capital flight, what is the effect on its interest rate and
exchange rate?

3. Suppose that a textile workers’ union encourages
people to buy only American-made clothes. What

Problems and Applications
1. Japan generally runs a significant trade surplus.
Do you think this surplus is most related to high
foreign demand for Japanese goods, low Japanese
demand for foreign goods, a high Japanese saving
rate relative to Japanese investment, or structural
barriers against imports into Japan? Explain your
answer.
2. Suppose that Congress is considering an investment
tax credit, which subsidizes domestic investment.
a. How does this policy affect national saving,
domestic investment, net capital outflow, the
interest rate, the exchange rate, and the trade
balance?
b. Representatives of several large exporters oppose
the policy. Why might that be the case?
3. The chapter notes that the rise in the U.S. trade
deficit during the 1980s was largely due to the rise
in the U.S. budget deficit. On the other hand, the
popular press sometimes claims that the increased
trade deficit resulted from a decline in the quality
of U.S. products relative to foreign products.
a. Assume that U.S. products did decline in relative
quality during the 1980s. How did this decline
affect net exports at any given exchange rate?
b. Draw a three-panel diagram to show the effect of
this shift in net exports on the U.S. real exchange
rate and trade balance.
c. Is the claim in the popular press consistent with
the model in this chapter? Does a decline in the
quality of U.S. products have any effect on the
U.S. standard of living? (Hint: When a country
sells its goods to foreigners, what does it receive in
return?)
4. An economist discussing trade policy in The New
Republic wrote, “One of the benefits of the United
States removing its trade restrictions [is] the gain to
U.S. industries that produce goods for export. Export

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 707

industries would find it easier to sell their goods
abroad—even if other countries didn’t follow our
example and reduce their trade barriers.” Explain in
words why U.S. export industries would benefit from
a reduction in restrictions on imports to the United
States.
5. Suppose the French suddenly develop a strong taste
for California wines. Answer the following questions
in words and with a diagram.
a. What happens to the demand for dollars in the
market for foreign-currency exchange?
b. What happens to the value of the dollar in the
market for foreign-currency exchange?
c. What happens to U.S. net exports?
6. Senator Blowhard renounces his past support
for protectionism: “The U.S. trade deficit must
be reduced, but import quotas only annoy our
trading partners. If we subsidize U.S. exports
instead, we can reduce the deficit by increasing our
competitiveness.” Using a three-panel diagram,
show the effect of an export subsidy on net exports
and the real exchange rate. Do you agree with the
senator?
7. Suppose the United States decides to subsidize the
export of U.S. agricultural products, but it does not
increase taxes or decrease any other government
spending to offset this expenditure. Using a threepanel diagram, show what happens to national
saving, domestic investment, net capital outflow,
the interest rate, the exchange rate, and the trade
balance. Also explain in words how this U.S. policy
affects the amount of imports, exports, and net
exports.
8. Suppose that real interest rates increase across
Europe. Explain how this development affects U.S.
net capital outflow. Then explain how it affects U.S.
net exports by using a formula from the chapter and

13/09/22 6:46 PM

708

Part XI The Macroeconomics of Open Economies

this increase in private saving have a large or
small effect on U.S. domestic investment?
b. If the elasticity of U.S. exports with respect to the
real exchange rate is very low, will this increase in
private saving have a large or small effect on the
U.S. real exchange rate?

by drawing a diagram. What happens to the U.S. real
interest rate and real exchange rate?
9. Suppose that Americans decide to increase their
saving.
a. If the elasticity of U.S. net capital outflow with
respect to the real interest rate is very high, will

QuickQuiz Answers
1. c

22718_Ch33_ptg01.indd 708

2. b

3. d

4. a

5. b

6. c

7. d

8. a

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter

34

SHIFT DRIVE/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM; ERDARK/E+/GETTY IMAGES

Aggregate
Demand and
Aggregate Supply

conomic activity fluctuates from year to year. In most years,
the production of goods and services rises. Because of
increases in the labor force, increases in the capital stock, and
advances in technological knowledge, the economy can produce
more and more over time. This growth allows people to enjoy a
higher standard of living. On average, over the past half century,
the production of the U.S. economy as measured by real GDP has
grown by about 3 percent per year.
In some years, however, instead of expanding, the economy
contracts. Firms find themselves unable to sell all the goods and
services they have to offer, so they reduce production. Workers are
laid off, unemployment becomes widespread, and factories are
left idle. With the economy producing fewer goods and services,
real GDP and other measures of income decline. Such a period of

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 709

13/09/22 6:46 PM

710

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

recession
a period of declining
real incomes and rising
unemployment

depression
a severe recession

falling incomes and rising unemployment is called a recession. When it is severe,
it is sometimes called a depression.
In 2008 and 2009, the U.S. economy experienced a downturn that is now called
“The Great Recession.” From the fourth quarter of 2007 to the second quarter of
2009, real GDP fell by 4.0 percent. The unemployment rate rose from 4.4 percent in
May 2007 to 10.0 percent in October 2009, the highest level in more than a quarter
century, and it remained above 8 percent for the next three years. Not surprisingly,
for students graduating during this time, good jobs were hard to find.
The next recession occurred in 2020 during the coronavirus pandemic, and it was
quicker and steeper. Real GDP fell by 10 percent from the fourth quarter of 2019 to
the second quarter of 2020. Unemployment rose from 3.5 percent in February 2020
to 14.8 percent just two months later. This time, the economy rebounded quickly. In
December 2021, the unemployment rate was back to 3.9 percent, and the number
of job openings reached a record high.
What causes short-run fluctuations in economic activity? What, if anything, can
public policy do to prevent periods of falling incomes and rising unemployment?
When downturns occur, how can policymakers reduce their length and severity?
We now take up these questions.
The variables at the center of our analysis are familiar from previous chapters.
They include GDP, unemployment, interest rates, and the price level. Also familiar
are the policy instruments of government spending, taxes, and the money supply.
What differs from our earlier discussions is the time horizon. So far, our goal has been
to explain the behavior of these variables in the long run. Our goal now is to explain
their short-run deviations from long-run trends. In other words, instead of focusing
on the forces that explain economic growth from generation to generation, we are
now interested in the forces that explain economic fluctuations from year to year.
Economists debate how best to explain short-run fluctuations, but most use the
model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply. This chapter introduces the
model’s two pieces: the aggregate-demand curve and the aggregate-supply curve.
But first, let’s look at some facts that describe the ups and downs of the economy.

34-1 Three Key Facts about Economic Fluctuations
Short-run fluctuations in economic activity have occurred in all countries throughout
history. Three facts are most important in describing these fluctuations.

34-1a Fact 1: Economic Fluctuations Are Irregular
and Unpredictable
Fluctuations in the economy are often called the business cycle. As this term suggests, economic fluctuations correspond to changes in business conditions. When
real GDP grows rapidly, business is good. During such expansionary periods, most
firms find that customers are plentiful and profits are growing. But when real GDP
falls during recessions, businesses have trouble. During periods of economic contraction, most firms experience declining sales and dwindling profits.
The term business cycle is somewhat misleading, however. It suggests that
economic fluctuations follow a regular, predictable pattern, like a sine wave or a
heartbeat. In fact, fluctuations in economic activity are not at all regular, and they
are almost impossible to predict with much accuracy.
Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows real GDP for the U.S. economy since 1972. The shaded
areas represent recessions, and you can see that they don’t come at regular intervals.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 710

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

Figure 1
A Look at Short-Run Economic
Fluctuations
This figure shows real GDP in
panel (a), investment spending
in panel (b), and unemployment
in panel (c) for the U.S.
economy. Recessions are shown
as the shaded areas. Notice
that real GDP and investment
spending decline during
recessions, while unemployment
rises.
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce; U.S. Department
of Labor.

Billions of
2012 Dollars
$18,000

711

(a) Real GDP

16,000
14,000
12,000
Real GDP

10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
1970

1975

1980

1985

Billions of
2012 Dollars

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2005

2010

2015

2020

2005

2010

2015

2020

(b) Investment Spending

$3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
Investment
spending

1,500
1,000
500
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

Percent of
Labor Force
12%

1990

1995

2000

(c) Unemployment Rate

10
8

Unemployment
rate

6
4
2
0
1970

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 711

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

13/09/22 6:46 PM

712

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Sometimes recessions are close together, such as those of 1980 and 1982. Sometimes
the economy goes many years without a recession. The longest period in U.S. history
without a recession lasted 128 months. It began in June 2009 and ended in February
2020, when the coronavirus recession began.

ROBERT MANKOFF/CARTOONSTOCK LTD

34-1b Fact 2: Most Macroeconomic Quantities Fluctuate
Together

“You’re fired. Pass it on.”

Real GDP is the variable most commonly used to monitor short-run changes in
the economy because it is the most comprehensive measure of economic activity. It measures the value of all final goods and services produced within a given
period of time as well as the total income (adjusted for inflation) of everyone in
the economy.
It turns out, however, that for monitoring short-run fluctuations, it
does not really matter which measure of economic activity you use. Most
macroeconomic variables that measure some type of income, spending, or
production fluctuate closely together. When real GDP falls in a recession,
so do personal income, corporate profits, consumer spending, investment
spending, industrial production, retail sales, home sales, auto sales, and
so on. Because recessions are economy-wide phenomena, they appear
in many sources of macroeconomic data.
Although many macroeconomic variables fluctuate together, they
move by different amounts. In particular, as panel (b) of Figure 1 shows,
investment spending varies greatly over the business cycle. Investment
averages only about one-sixth of GDP, but it accounts for about twothirds of the fall in GDP during recessions. In other words, when the economy
contracts, much of the decline is due to reduced spending on new factories,
housing, and inventories.

34-1c Fact 3: As Output Falls, Unemployment Rises
Changes in the economy’s output of goods and services are strongly correlated with
changes in the utilization of the economy’s labor force. In other words, when real
GDP declines, the unemployment rate rises. This fact is hardly surprising: When
firms choose to reduce production, they lay off workers, expanding the pool of
unemployed.
Panel (c) of Figure 1 shows the unemployment rate in the U.S. economy since
1972. Once again, the shaded areas indicate recessions. The figure shows that, in
each recession, the unemployment rate rises substantially. When the recession ends
and real GDP starts to expand, the unemployment rate gradually declines. Because
there are always some workers between jobs, the unemployment rate is never zero.
Instead, it fluctuates around its natural rate of about 5 percent.

QuickQuiz
1. When the economy goes into a recession, real GDP
________ and unemployment ________.
a. rises; rises
b. rises; falls
c. falls; rises
d. falls; falls

2. Recessions occur
a. regularly, about every 3 years.
b. regularly, about every 7 years.
c. regularly, about every 12 years.
d. irregularly.
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 712

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

713

34-2 Explaining Short-Run Economic Fluctuations
Describing what happens to economies as they fluctuate is easy. Explaining why
these fluctuations occur is more difficult. Compared with the topics in previous
chapters, the theory of economic fluctuations remains controversial. This chapter
begins to develop the model that most economists use to explain short-run fluctuations in economic activity.

34-2a The Assumptions of Classical Economics
Previous chapters developed theories to explain what determines most important
macroeconomic variables in the long run. Chapter 26 explained the level and growth
of productivity and real GDP. Chapters 27 and 28 explained how the financial system works and how the real interest rate adjusts to balance saving and investment.
Chapter 29 explained why there is always some unemployment in the economy.
Chapters 30 and 31 explained the monetary system and how changes in the money
supply affect the price level, the inflation rate, and the nominal interest rate. Chapters
32 and 33 extended this analysis to open economies to explain the trade balance
and the exchange rate.
This previous analysis was based on two related ideas: the classical dichotomy
and monetary neutrality. Recall that the classical dichotomy is the separation of
variables into real variables (those that measure quantities or relative prices) and
nominal variables (those measured in terms of money). According to classical macroeconomic theory, changes in the money supply affect nominal variables but not
real variables. As a result of this monetary neutrality, we were able to examine the
determinants of real variables (real GDP, the real interest rate, and unemployment)
without introducing nominal variables (the money supply and the price level).
In a sense, money does not matter in a classical world. If the quantity of money in
the economy were to double, everything would cost twice as much, and everyone’s
income would be twice as high. But so what? The change would be nominal (by
the standard meaning of “nearly insignificant”). The things that people really care
about—whether they have a job, how many goods and services they can afford,
and so on—would be exactly the same.
This classical view is sometimes described by the saying, “Money is a veil.” That
is, nominal variables may be the first things we see when we observe an economy
because economic variables are often expressed in units of money. But more important are the real variables and the forces that determine them. According to classical
theory, to understand these real variables, we need to look behind the veil.

34-2b The Reality of Short-Run Fluctuations
Do these assumptions of classical macroeconomic theory apply to the world in which
we live? The answer to this question is central to understanding how the economy
works. Most economists believe that classical theory describes the world in the
long run but not in the short run.
Consider again the impact of money on the economy. Most economists believe
that, beyond a period of several years, changes in the money supply affect prices
and other nominal variables but do not affect real GDP, unemployment, and other
real variables—just as classical theory says. When studying year-to-year changes
in the economy, however, the assumption of monetary neutrality is no longer
appropriate. In the short run, real and nominal variables are highly intertwined,
and changes in the money supply can temporarily push real GDP away from its
long-run trend.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 713

13/09/22 6:46 PM

714

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

model of aggregate
demand and
aggregate supply
the model that most
economists use to explain
short-run fluctuations in
economic activity around
its long-run trend

aggregate-demand
curve
a curve that shows the
quantity of goods and
services that households,
firms, the government,
and customers abroad
want to buy at each price
level

aggregate-supply
curve
a curve that shows
the quantity of goods
and services that firms
choose to produce and
sell at each price level

Figure 2
Aggregate Demand and
Aggregate Supply
Economists use the model of
aggregate demand and aggregate
supply to analyze economic
fluctuations. On the vertical axis is
the overall level of prices. On the
horizontal axis is the economy’s
total output of goods and services.
Output and the price level
adjust to the point at which the
aggregate-supply and aggregatedemand curves intersect.

Even classical economists, such as David Hume, realized that monetary neutrality did not hold in the short run. From his vantage point in 18th-century England,
Hume observed that when the money supply expanded after gold discoveries, it
took some time for prices to rise and that, in the meantime, the economy enjoyed
higher employment and production.
To understand how the economy works in the short run, we need a new model.
It can be built using many of the tools developed in previous chapters, but it must
abandon the classical dichotomy and the neutrality of money. We can no longer
separate the analysis of real variables such as output and employment from the
analysis of nominal variables such as money and the price level. Our new model
focuses on how real and nominal variables interact.

34-2c The Model of Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply
Our model of short-run economic fluctuations focuses on the behavior of two variables. The first is the economy’s output of goods and services, as measured by real
GDP. The second is the average level of prices, as measured by the CPI or the GDP
deflator. Notice that output is a real variable, and the price level is a nominal variable.
By focusing on the relationship between these two variables, we are departing from
the classical assumption that real and nominal variables can be studied separately.
We analyze fluctuations in the economy as a whole using the model of aggregate
demand and aggregate supply, which is illustrated in Figure 2. On the vertical
axis is the overall price level in the economy. On the horizontal axis is the overall
quantity of goods and services produced in the economy. The aggregate-demand
curve shows the quantity of goods and services that households, firms, the government, and customers abroad want to buy at each price level. The aggregate-supply
curve shows the quantity of goods and services that firms produce and sell at each
price level. According to this model, the price level and the quantity of output adjust
to bring aggregate demand and aggregate supply into balance.

Price
Level

Aggregate
supply

Equilibrium
price level

Aggregate
demand

0

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 714

Equilibrium
output

Quantity of
Output

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

715

It is tempting to view the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply as
nothing more than a large version of the model of market demand and market supply
introduced in Chapter 4. But, in fact, this model is quite different. When we consider
demand and supply in the market for a specific good—ice cream, for instance—the
behavior of buyers and sellers depends on the ability of resources to move from one
market to another. When the price of ice cream rises, the quantity demanded falls
because buyers can use their incomes to buy products other than ice cream. Similarly,
a higher price of ice cream raises the quantity supplied because firms that produce ice
cream can increase production by hiring workers from other parts of the economy.
This microeconomic substitution from one market to another is impossible for the
economy as a whole. After all, the quantity that our model is trying to explain—real
GDP—measures the total quantity of goods and services produced by all firms in
all markets. To understand why the aggregate-demand curve slopes downward
and why the aggregate-supply curve slopes upward, we need a macroeconomic
theory that explains the total quantity of goods and services demanded and the total
quantity of goods and services supplied. Developing such a theory is our next task.

QuickQuiz
3. According to classical macroeconomic theory and
monetary neutrality, changes in the money supply
affect
a. the unemployment rate.
b. real GDP.
c. the GDP deflator.
d. none of the above.

5. In the model of aggregate demand and aggregate
supply, the quantity of ________ is on the horizontal
axis, and the ________ is on the vertical axis.
a. output; interest rate
b. output; price level
c. money; interest rate
d. money; price level

4. Most economists believe that classical macroeconomic theory
a. is valid only in the long run.
b. is valid only in the short run.
c. is always valid.
d. is never valid.
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

34-3 The Aggregate-Demand Curve
The aggregate-demand curve depicts the quantity of all goods and services demanded in the economy at any price level. As Figure 3 illustrates, the aggregate-demand
curve slopes downward. Other things being equal, a decrease in the economy’s
overall level of prices (from, say, P1 to P2) raises the quantity of goods and services
demanded (from Y1 to Y2). Conversely, an increase in the price level reduces the
quantity of goods and services demanded.

34-3a Why the Aggregate-Demand Curve Slopes Downward
Why does a change in the price level move the quantity of goods and services
demanded in the opposite direction? To answer this question, it is useful to recall
that an economy’s GDP (which we denote as Y) is the sum of its consumption (C),
investment (I), government purchases (G), and net exports (NX):
Y 5 C 1 I 1 G 1 NX.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 715

13/09/22 6:46 PM

716

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Figure 3
The Aggregate-Demand Curve
A fall in the price level from P1
to P2 increases the quantity of
goods and services demanded
from Y1 to Y2. There are three
reasons for this negative
relationship. As the price level
falls, real wealth rises, interest
rates fall, and the exchange
rate depreciates. These
effects stimulate spending on
consumption, investment, and
net exports. Increased spending
on any or all of these components
of output means a larger quantity
of goods and services demanded.

Price
Level

P1

P2
1. A decrease
in the price
level . . .

Aggregate
demand
0

Y1

Y2

2. . . . increases the quantity of goods
and services demanded.

Quantity of
Output

Each of these four components contributes to the aggregate demand for goods and
services. For now, we assume that government spending is fixed by policy. The other
three components of spending—consumption, investment, and net exports—depend on
economic conditions and, in particular, on the price level. To understand the downward
slope of the aggregate-demand curve, we must examine how the price level affects the
quantity of goods and services demanded for consumption, investment, and net exports.

The Price Level and Consumption: The Wealth Effect Consider the money
you hold in your wallet and bank account. The nominal value of this money is fixed:
One dollar is always worth one dollar. Yet the real value of a dollar can change. If
a candy bar costs one dollar, then a dollar is worth one candy bar. If the price of a
candy bar falls to 50 cents, one dollar is worth two candy bars. Thus, when the price
level falls, the dollars you hold rise in value, increasing your real wealth and your
ability to buy goods and services.
This logic provides the first reason the aggregate-demand curve slopes downward.
A decrease in the price level raises the real value of money and makes consumers
wealthier, encouraging them to spend more. The increase in consumer spending
means a larger quantity of goods and services demanded. Conversely, an increase
in the price level reduces the real value of money and makes consumers poorer,
reducing consumer spending and the quantity of goods and services demanded.
The Price Level and Investment: The Interest-Rate Effect The price level
is one determinant of the quantity of money demanded. When the price level is
lower, people do not need to hold as much money to buy the goods and services
they want. Therefore, when the price level falls, people try to reduce their money
holdings by lending some of it out. For instance, they might use their excess money
to buy interest-bearing bonds. Or they might deposit the excess money in an interestbearing savings account, and the bank would lend out these funds. In either case,

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 716

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

717

as people try to convert some of their money into interest-bearing assets, they drive
down interest rates. (The next chapter analyzes this process in more detail.)
Interest rates, in turn, affect spending on goods and services. Because a lower
interest rate makes borrowing less expensive, it encourages firms to borrow more
to invest in new plants and equipment, and it encourages households to borrow
more to invest in new housing. (A lower interest rate might also stimulate consumer
spending, especially spending on large, durable purchases such as cars, which are
often bought on credit.) In short, a lower interest rate increases the quantity of goods
and services demanded.
This logic provides the second reason the aggregate-demand curve slopes
downward. A lower price level reduces the interest rate, encourages spending
on investment goods, and increases the quantity of goods and services demanded.
Conversely, a higher price level raises the interest rate, discourages investment
spending, and decreases the quantity of goods and services demanded.

The Price Level and Net Exports: The Exchange-Rate Effect For the reasons
just discussed, a lower price level in the United States lowers the U.S. interest rate.
In response to the lower interest rate, some investors will seek higher returns by
moving their assets out of the United States. For instance, as the interest rate on
American bonds falls, a mutual fund might sell American bonds to buy German
bonds. As the mutual fund tries to convert its dollars into euros to buy the German
bonds, it increases the supply of dollars in the market for foreign-currency exchange.
The increased supply of dollars to be exchanged for euros causes the dollar to
depreciate relative to the euro. This alters the real exchange rate—the relative price
of domestic and foreign goods. Because each dollar buys fewer units of foreign
currencies, foreign goods become more expensive compared with domestic goods.
The change in relative prices affects spending at home and abroad. Because foreign
goods are more expensive, Americans buy less from other countries, reducing U.S.
imports of goods and services. At the same time, because U.S. goods have become
relatively cheap, foreigners buy more from the United States, increasing U.S. exports.
Net exports equal exports minus imports, so both of these changes cause U.S. net
exports to increase. In this way, the depreciation of the dollar leads to an increase
in the quantity of goods and services demanded.
This logic yields the third reason the aggregate-demand curve slopes downward.
When a fall in the U.S. price level causes U.S. interest rates to fall, the real value
of the dollar declines in foreign exchange markets. This depreciation stimulates
U.S. net exports and increases the quantity of goods and services demanded.
Conversely, when the U.S. price level rises and causes U.S. interest rates to rise,
the real value of the dollar increases, and this appreciation reduces U.S. net exports
and the quantity of goods and services demanded.
Summing Up There are three distinct but related reasons a fall in the price level
increases the quantity of goods and services demanded:
1. Consumers become wealthier, stimulating the demand for consumption
goods.
2. Interest rates fall, stimulating the demand for investment goods.
3. The currency depreciates, stimulating the demand for net exports.
The same three effects work in reverse: When the price level rises, decreased wealth
depresses consumer spending, higher interest rates depress investment spending,
and currency appreciation depresses net exports.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 717

13/09/22 6:46 PM

718

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Here is a thought experiment to hone your intuition about these effects. Imagine
that one day you wake up and notice that, for some mysterious reason, the prices of
all goods and services have fallen by half, so the dollars you are holding are worth
twice as much. In real terms, you now have twice as much money as you had when
you went to bed the night before. What would you do with the extra money? You
could spend it at your favorite restaurant, increasing consumer spending. You could
lend it out (by buying a bond or depositing it in a bank), reducing interest rates
and increasing investment spending. Or you could invest it overseas (by buying
shares in an international mutual fund), reducing the real exchange value of the
dollar and increasing net exports. No matter which of these options you choose,
the fall in the price level leads to an increase in the quantity of goods and services
demanded. This relationship is what the downward slope of the aggregate-demand
curve represents.
Keep in mind that the aggregate-demand curve (like all demand curves) is drawn
holding “other things equal.” In particular, these three explanations of the downward-sloping aggregate-demand curve assume that the money supply is fixed. That
is, we have been considering how a change in the price level affects the demand
for goods and services, holding the amount of money in the economy constant. As
we will see, a change in the quantity of money shifts the aggregate-demand curve.
At this point, just remember that the aggregate-demand curve is drawn for a given
quantity of the money supply.

34-3b Why the Aggregate-Demand Curve Might Shift
The downward slope of the aggregate-demand curve shows that a fall in the price
level increases the overall quantity of goods and services demanded. Many other
factors also affect the quantity of goods and services demanded. When one of these
other factors changes, the quantity of goods and services demanded at every price
level changes, and the aggregate-demand curve shifts.
Here are examples of events that shift aggregate demand. We can group them
according to the component of spending that is most directly affected.

Shifts Arising from Changes in Consumption Suppose Americans suddenly
become more concerned about saving for retirement and, as a result, reduce current consumption. Because the quantity of goods and services demanded at any
price level is now lower, the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the left. Conversely,
imagine that a stock market boom makes people wealthier and less concerned about
saving. The resulting increase in consumer spending means a greater quantity of
goods and services demanded at any price level, so the aggregate-demand curve
shifts to the right.
Any event that changes how much people want to consume at a given price
level shifts the aggregate-demand curve. One policy variable that has this effect
is taxation. When the government cuts taxes, it encourages people to spend more,
so the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right. When the government raises
taxes, people cut back on their spending, and the aggregate-demand curve shifts
to the left.
Shifts Arising from Changes in Investment Any event that changes how much
firms want to invest at a given price level also shifts the aggregate-demand curve. For
instance, imagine that the computer industry introduces a faster line of computers,
and many firms decide to invest in new computer systems. Because the quantity of

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 718

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

719

goods and services demanded at any price level is higher, the aggregate-demand
curve shifts to the right. Conversely, if firms become pessimistic about future business conditions, they may cut back on investment spending, shifting the aggregatedemand curve to the left.
Tax policy can also influence aggregate demand through investment. For example,
other things being equal, an investment tax credit (a tax rebate tied to a firm’s
investment spending) increases the quantity of investment goods that firms want
to buy and therefore shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the right. The repeal
of an investment tax credit reduces investment and shifts the aggregate-demand
curve to the left.
Another policy variable that can influence investment and aggregate demand
is the money supply. As the next chapter explains, an increase in the money
supply lowers the interest rate in the short run. This decrease in the interest
rate makes borrowing less costly, stimulating investment spending and shifting
the aggregate-demand curve to the right. Conversely, a decrease in the money
supply raises the interest rate, discourages investment spending, and shifts the
aggregate-demand curve to the left. Many economists believe that throughout
U.S. history, changes in monetary policy have been an important source of shifts
in aggregate demand.

Shifts Arising from Changes in Government Purchases The most direct
way that policymakers shift the aggregate-demand curve is through government
purchases. For example, suppose Congress decides to reduce purchases of new
weapons systems. Because the quantity of goods and services demanded at any
price level is lower, the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the left. Conversely, if
state governments start building more highways, the result is a greater quantity of
goods and services demanded at any price level, so the aggregate-demand curve
shifts to the right.
Shifts Arising from Changes in Net Exports Any event that changes net exports
for a given price level also shifts aggregate demand. For instance, when Europe has
a recession, it buys fewer goods from the United States. U.S. net exports decline
at every price level, shifting the aggregate-demand curve for the U.S. economy to
the left. When Europe recovers from its recession, it buys more U.S. goods, and the
aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right.
Net exports can also change because international speculators affect the exchange
rate. Suppose, for instance, that these speculators lose confidence in foreign economies and want to move wealth into the U.S. economy. In doing so, they bid up the
value of the U.S. dollar in the foreign exchange market. This appreciation of the
dollar makes U.S. goods more expensive relative to foreign goods, depressing net
exports and shifting the aggregate-demand curve to the left. Conversely, speculation that causes a depreciation of the dollar stimulates net exports and shifts the
aggregate-demand curve to the right.
Summing Up The next chapter analyzes the aggregate-demand curve in more
detail. There, we examine more precisely how the tools of monetary and fiscal policy
can shift aggregate demand and when policymakers should use these tools for that
purpose. For now, you should have some understanding of why the aggregatedemand curve slopes downward and what kinds of events and policies can shift
this curve. Table 1 summarizes what we have learned so far.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 719

13/09/22 6:46 PM

720

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Table 1
The Aggregate-Demand
Curve: Summary

Why Does the Aggregate-Demand Curve Slope Downward?

1. The Wealth Effect: A lower price level increases real wealth, stimulating spending
on consumption.
2. The Interest-Rate Effect: A lower price level reduces the interest rate, stimulating
spending on investment.
3. The Exchange-Rate Effect: A lower price level causes the real exchange rate to
depreciate, stimulating spending on net exports.
Why Might the Aggregate-Demand Curve Shift?

1. Shifts Arising from Changes in Consumption: An event that causes consumers
to spend more at a given price level (a tax cut, a stock market boom) shifts the
aggregate-demand curve to the right. An event that causes consumers to spend less
at a given price level (a tax hike, a stock market decline) shifts the curve to the left.
2. Shifts Arising from Changes in Investment: An event that causes firms to invest
more at a given price level (optimism about the future, a fall in interest rates due
to an increase in the money supply) shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the
right. An event that causes firms to invest less at a given price level (pessimism
about the future, a rise in interest rates due to a decrease in the money supply)
shifts the curve to the left.
3. Shifts Arising from Changes in Government Purchases: An increase in
government purchases of goods and services (greater spending on defense or
highway construction) shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the right. A decrease
in government purchases of goods and services (a cutback in defense or highway
spending) shifts the curve to the left.
4. Shifts Arising from Changes in Net Exports: An event that raises spending on
net exports at a given price level (a boom overseas, speculation that causes a
currency depreciation) shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the right. An event
that reduces spending on net exports at a given price level (a recession overseas,
speculation that causes a currency appreciation) shifts the curve to the left.

QuickQuiz
6. The aggregate-demand curve slopes downward
because a fall in the price level causes
a. real wealth to decrease.
b. the interest rate to decline.
c. the currency to appreciate.
d. all of the above.

7. Which of the following would shift the aggregatedemand curve to the left?
a. a decline in the stock market
b. an increase in taxes
c. a decrease in government spending
d. all of the above
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

34-4 The Aggregate-Supply Curve
The aggregate-supply curve shows the total quantity of goods and services that
firms produce and sell at any price level. Unlike the aggregate-demand curve,
which always slopes downward, the slope of the aggregate-supply curve depends
on the time horizon being examined. In the long run, the aggregate-supply curve

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 720

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

721

is vertical, while in the short run, it slopes upward. This section explains both
the long-run aggregate-supply curve and the short-run aggregate-supply curve. In
doing so, it shows why the economy can, in the short run, deviate from the long-run
equilibrium described by classical theory.

34-4a Why the Aggregate-Supply Curve Is Vertical in
the Long Run
What determines the quantity of goods and services supplied in the long run? We
implicitly answered this question earlier in the book when discussing economic
growth. In the long run, an economy’s production of goods and services (its real
GDP) depends on its supplies of labor, capital, and natural resources and on the
available technology used to turn these factors of production into goods and services.
When we analyzed the forces that govern long-run growth, we did not mention
the overall level of prices. The price level was explained in a separate chapter, which
developed the quantity theory of money. We learned that if two economies were
identical in every way except that one had twice as much money in circulation as
the other, the price level would be twice as high in the economy with more money.
But because the amount of money does not affect technology or the supplies of
labor, capital, and natural resources, the output of goods and services in the two
economies would be the same.
Because the price level does not affect the long-run determinants of real GDP, the
long-run aggregate-supply curve is vertical, as in Figure 4. In other words, in the
long run, the economy’s labor, capital, natural resources, and technology determine
the total quantity of goods and services supplied, and this quantity supplied is the
same regardless of the price level.
The vertical long-run aggregate-supply curve is a graphical representation of
the classical dichotomy and monetary neutrality. As we have discussed, classical

Figure 4
The Long-Run AggregateSupply Curve
In the long run, the quantity
of output supplied depends
on the economy’s quantities
of labor, capital, and natural
resources and on the
technology for turning these
inputs into output. Because
the quantity supplied does not
depend on the overall price
level, the long-run aggregatesupply curve is vertical at the
natural level of output.

Price
Level
Long-run
aggregate
supply
P1

P2

0

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 721

2. . . . does not affect
the quantity of goods
and services supplied
in the long run.

1. A change
in the price
level . . .
Natural level
of output

Quantity of
Output

13/09/22 6:46 PM

722

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

macroeconomic theory is based on the assumption that real variables do not depend
on nominal variables. The long-run aggregate-supply curve is consistent with this
idea because it implies that the quantity of output (a real variable) does not depend
on the level of prices (a nominal variable). As noted earlier, most economists believe
this principle works well when studying the economy over a period of many years
but not for year-to-year changes. For this reason, the aggregate-supply curve is
vertical only in the long run.

34-4b Why the Long-Run Aggregate-Supply Curve Might Shift

natural level of output
the production of goods
and services that an
economy achieves in
the long run when
unemployment is at its
normal rate

Because classical macroeconomic theory describes the quantity of goods and
services produced by an economy in the long run, it also explains the position
of the long-run aggregate-supply curve. The long-run level of production is
sometimes called potential output or full-employment output. To be more precise, we call it the natural level of output because it shows what the economy
produces when unemployment is at its natural, or normal, rate. The natural
level of output is the rate of production toward which the economy gravitates
in the long run.
Any change in the economy that alters the natural level of output shifts the
long-run aggregate-supply curve. Because output in the classical model depends
on labor, capital, natural resources, and technological knowledge, we can categorize shifts in the long-run aggregate-supply curve as arising from these four
sources.

Shifts Arising from Changes in Labor Imagine that an economy experiences
an increase in immigration. Because this increase results in a greater number of
workers, the quantity of goods and services supplied would also increase. As a
result, the long-run aggregate-supply curve would shift to the right. Conversely, if
many workers left the economy to go abroad, the long-run aggregate-supply curve
would shift to the left.
The position of the long-run aggregate-supply curve also depends on the natural
rate of unemployment, so any change in this rate shifts the long-run aggregatesupply curve. For example, if Congress made unemployment insurance substantially
more generous, unemployed workers might not search as hard for new jobs, increasing the natural rate of unemployment and reducing the economy’s production of
goods and services. As a result, the long-run aggregate-supply curve would shift
to the left. Conversely, if Congress enacted a successful job training program for
unemployed workers, the natural rate of unemployment would fall, and the longrun aggregate-supply curve would shift to the right.
Shifts Arising from Changes in Capital An increase in the economy’s capital
stock raises productivity, thereby increasing the quantity of goods and services supplied. As a result, the long-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to the right. Conversely,
a decrease in the economy’s capital stock reduces productivity and the quantity of
goods and services supplied, shifting the long-run aggregate-supply curve to the left.
Notice that the same logic applies regardless of whether we are discussing physical capital such as machines and factories or human capital such as college degrees.
An increase in either type of capital will raise the economy’s ability to produce goods
and services and shift the long-run aggregate-supply curve to the right.
Shifts Arising from Changes in Natural Resources An economy’s production
depends on its natural resources, including its land, minerals, and weather. The

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 722

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

723

discovery of a new mineral deposit shifts the long-run aggregate-supply curve to
the right. A change in weather patterns that makes farming more difficult shifts the
long-run aggregate-supply curve to the left.
In many countries, crucial natural resources are imported. A change in the
availability of these resources can also shift the aggregate-supply curve. For
example, as we discuss later in this chapter, developments in the world oil market have historically been an important source of shifts in aggregate supply for
oil-importing nations.

Shifts Arising from Changes in Technological Knowledge Perhaps the most
important reason that the economy today produces more than it did a generation
ago is that technological knowledge has advanced. The development of industrial
robots, for instance, has allowed firms to produce more goods and services from
any given amount of labor, capital, and natural resources. As robot use has spread,
it has shifted the long-run aggregate-supply curve to the right.
Although not precisely technological, many other events act like changes in
technology. For instance, opening up international trade has effects similar to
inventing new production processes because it allows a country to specialize in
higher-productivity industries; therefore, it also shifts the long-run aggregatesupply curve to the right. Conversely, if the government passes new regulations
preventing firms from using some production methods, perhaps to address worker
safety or environmental concerns, the result is a leftward shift in the long-run
aggregate-supply curve.
Summing Up Because the long-run aggregate-supply curve reflects the classical
model, it provides a new way to express the analysis in earlier chapters. Any policy
or event that raised real GDP in previous chapters can be described as increasing
the quantity of goods and services supplied and shifting the long-run aggregatesupply curve to the right. Any policy or event that lowered real GDP in previous
chapters can be said to reduce the quantity of goods and services supplied and to
shift the long-run aggregate-supply curve to the left.

34-4c Using Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply
to Depict Long-Run Growth and Inflation
Having introduced the economy’s aggregate-demand curve and the longrun aggregate-supply curve, we have a new way to describe the economy’s long-run
trends. Figure 5 illustrates the changes that occur in an economy from decade to
decade. Notice that both curves are shifting. Although many forces influence the
economy in the long run and can, in theory, cause such shifts, the two most important forces in practice are technology and monetary policy. Technological progress
enhances an economy’s ability to produce goods and services, and the resulting
increases in output are reflected in continual shifts of the long-run aggregate-supply
curve to the right. At the same time, because the Fed increases the money supply
over time, the aggregate-demand curve also shifts to the right. As the figure shows,
the result is continuing growth in output (as shown by increasing Y) and continuing
inflation (as shown by increasing P). This is just another way of representing the
classical analysis of growth and inflation conducted in earlier chapters.
The purpose of developing the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply,
however, is not to dress our previous long-run conclusions in new clothing. Instead,
it is to provide a framework for short-run analysis, as we will see in a moment. As we
develop the short-run model, we simplify the analysis by omitting the ongoing growth

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 723

13/09/22 6:46 PM

724

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Figure 5
Long-Run Growth and Inflation
in the Model of Aggregate
Demand and Aggregate Supply

As the economy becomes better able to produce goods and services, primarily
because of technological progress, the long-run aggregate-supply curve shifts
to the right. At the same time, as the Fed increases the money supply, the
aggregate-demand curve also shifts to the right. In this figure, output grows from
Y2000 to Y2010 and then to Y2020, and the price level rises from P2000 to P2010 and
then to P2020. Thus, the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply offers
a new way to describe the classical analysis of growth and inflation.

2. . . . and growth in the
money supply shifts
aggregate demand . . .

Long-run
aggregate
supply,
LRAS2000

LRAS2010

LRAS2020

Price
Level

1. In the long run,
technological
progress shifts
long-run aggregate
supply . . .

P2020
4. . . . and
ongoing inflation.
P2010

Aggregate
demand, AD2020
P2000

AD2010

AD2000
0

Y2000

Y2010

Y2020

Quantity of
Output

3. . . . leading to growth
in output . . .

and inflation shown by the shifts in Figure 5. But always remember that long-run
trends are the background on which short-run fluctuations are superimposed. The
short-run fluctuations in output and the price level that we will be studying should
be viewed as deviations from the long-run trends of output growth and inflation.

34-4d Why the Aggregate-Supply Curve Slopes Upward
in the Short Run
The key difference between the economy in the short run and in the long run is
the behavior of aggregate supply. The long-run aggregate-supply curve is vertical
because, in the long run, the overall level of prices does not affect the economy’s
ability to produce goods and services. By contrast, in the short run, the price level
does affect the economy’s output. That is, over a period of a year or two, an increase
in the price level tends to increase the quantity of goods and services supplied, and
a decrease in the price level tends to reduce the quantity of goods and services supplied. As a result, the short-run aggregate-supply curve slopes upward, as in Figure 6.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 724

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

Figure 6
The Short-Run AggregateSupply Curve
In the short run, a fall in
the price level from P1 to P2
reduces the quantity of output
supplied from Y1 to Y2. This
positive relationship could be
due to sticky wages, sticky
prices, or misperceptions.
Over time, wages, prices, and
perceptions adjust, so this
positive relationship is only
temporary.

725

Price
Level
Short-run
aggregate
supply
P1

P2
2. . . . reduces the quantity
of goods and services
supplied in the short run.

1. A decrease
in the price
level . . .
0

Y2

Y1

Quantity of
Output

Why do changes in the price level affect output in the short run? Macroeconomists
have proposed three theories for the upward slope of the short-run aggregatesupply curve. In each one, some market imperfection causes the supply side of the
economy to behave differently in the short run than it does in the long run. The
theories differ in their details but share a common theme: in a word, surprise. The
quantity of output supplied deviates from its long-run, or natural, level when
the actual price level in the economy deviates from the price level that people
expected. When the price level rises above the expected level, output rises above
its natural level, and when the price level falls below the expected level, output
falls below its natural level.

The Sticky-Wage Theory The first explanation for the upward slope of the shortrun aggregate-supply curve is the sticky-wage theory. This theory is the simplest of
the three approaches to aggregate supply, and some economists believe it highlights
the most important reason why the short run and long run differ. This theory of
short-run aggregate supply is one emphasized in this book.
According to this theory, the short-run aggregate-supply curve slopes upward
because nominal wages are slow to adjust to changing economic conditions. In other
words, wages are “sticky” in the short run. To some extent, the slow adjustment of
nominal wages is attributable to long-term contracts between workers and firms that
fix nominal wages, sometimes for as long as three years. This gradual adjustment
may also be attributable to slowly changing social norms and notions of fairness,
which can influence wage setting.
An example can help explain how sticky nominal wages can result in a shortrun aggregate-supply curve that slopes upward. Imagine that a year ago, a firm
expected the price level today to be at a certain level: We’ll call it 100. Based on this
expectation, it signed a contract with its workers agreeing to pay them, say, $30
an hour. In fact, the price level turns out to be only 95. Because prices have fallen
below expectations, the firm gets 5 percent less than expected for each unit of the
product that it sells. The cost of labor used to make the output, however, is stuck at

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 725

13/09/22 6:46 PM

726

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

$30 per hour. Production is now less profitable, so the firm hires fewer workers and
reduces the quantity of output supplied. Over time, the labor contract will expire,
and the firm can renegotiate with its workers for a lower nominal wage (which
they may accept because prices are lower), but in the meantime, employment and
production will remain below their long-run levels.
The same logic works in reverse. Suppose the price level turns out to be 105 and
the nominal wage remains stuck at $30. The firm sees that the amount it is paid for
each unit sold is up by 5 percent, while its labor costs are not. In response, it hires
more workers and increases the quantity of output supplied. Eventually, the workers will demand higher nominal wages to compensate for the higher price level.
But for a while, the firm can take advantage of the profit opportunity by increasing
employment and production above their long-run levels.
In short, according to the sticky-wage theory, the short-run aggregate-supply
curve slopes upward because nominal wages are based on expected prices and do
not respond immediately when the actual price level turns out to be different from
what was expected. This wage stickiness gives firms an incentive to produce less
output when the price level turns out lower than expected and to produce more
when the price level turns out higher than expected.

The Sticky-Price Theory Some economists have advocated another approach
to explaining the upward slope of the short-run aggregate-supply curve, called the
sticky-price theory. While the sticky-wage theory emphasizes that nominal wages
adjust slowly over time, the sticky-price theory focuses on the prices of some goods
and services, which also adjust sluggishly in response to changing economic conditions. This slow adjustment occurs in part because there are costs to changing
prices, called menu costs. These menu costs include the expense of printing and
distributing catalogs, the time required to change price tags, and even the managerial effort needed to decide on new prices. Because of these costs, prices as well as
wages may be sticky in the short run.
To see how sticky prices explain the aggregate-supply curve’s upward slope,
suppose that each firm in the economy announces its prices in advance based on the
economic conditions it expects for the coming year. Suppose further that after prices
are announced, the economy experiences an unexpected contraction in the money
supply, which (as we have learned) reduces the overall price level in the long run.
What happens in the short run? Some firms reduce their prices quickly in response
to the change in economic conditions, but many others want to avoid additional
menu costs and temporarily lag behind in cutting prices. Because these lagging
firms’ prices are too high, their sales decline. Declining sales, in turn, cause them
to cut back production and employment. In other words, an unexpected fall in the
price level leaves some firms with higher-than-desired prices, which depress their
sales and induce them to reduce the quantity of goods and services they produce.
Similar reasoning applies when the money supply and price level turn out to be
higher than what firms expected when they set their prices. Some firms raise prices
quickly in response to the new environment, but others lag behind. Their low prices
attract customers, inducing these firms to increase employment and production.
Again, for the overall economy, there is a positive association between an unexpected
movement in the price level and the quantity of output produced. The upward slope
of the short-run aggregate-supply curve reflects this positive association.
The Misperceptions Theory A third approach to explaining the upward slope
of the short-run aggregate-supply curve is the misperceptions theory. It holds that

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 726

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

727

changes in the overall price level can temporarily mislead suppliers about what is
happening in the markets in which they sell their output. Because of these shortrun misperceptions, suppliers respond to changes in the level of prices, leading to
an upward-sloping aggregate-supply curve.
To see how this might work, suppose the overall price level falls below the level
that suppliers expected. When suppliers see the prices of their products fall, they
may mistakenly believe that their relative prices have fallen; that is, they may believe
that their prices have fallen compared with other prices in the economy. For example,
wheat farmers may notice a fall in the price of wheat before they notice a fall in the
prices of the many items they buy as consumers. They may infer that the reward
for producing wheat is temporarily low, and they may respond by reducing the
quantity of wheat they supply. Similarly, workers may notice a fall in their nominal
wages before they notice that the prices of the goods they buy are also falling. They
may infer that the reward for working is temporarily low and respond by working
less. In both cases, a lower price level causes misperceptions about relative prices,
and these misperceptions induce suppliers to respond to the lower price level by
reducing the quantity of goods and services supplied.
Similar misperceptions arise when the price level is above what was expected.
Suppliers of goods and services may notice the price of their output rising and
infer, mistakenly, that their relative prices are rising. They would conclude that
it is a good time to produce more. Until their misperceptions are corrected, they
respond to the higher price level by increasing the quantity of goods and services supplied. This behavior results in a short-run aggregate-supply curve that
slopes upward.

Summing Up There are three explanations for the upward slope of the short-run
aggregate-supply curve: (1) sticky wages, (2) sticky prices, and (3) misperceptions
about relative prices. Economists debate which of these theories is correct, and it is
possible that each contains an element of truth. For our purposes, the similarities of
the theories are more important than the differences. All three suggest that output
deviates in the short run from its natural level when the actual price level deviates
from the price level that people had expected. We can express this mathematically
as follows:
Quantity
of output
supplied

Natural
5 level of
output

 Actual
Expected 
,
1 a  price
2 price


level

 level

where a is a number that determines how much output responds to unexpected
changes in the price level.
Notice that each of the three theories of short-run aggregate supply emphasizes a
problem that is likely to be temporary. Whether the upward slope of the aggregatesupply curve is attributable to sticky wages, sticky prices, or misperceptions, these
conditions will not last forever. Over time, nominal wages and prices will become
unstuck, and misperceptions about relative prices will be corrected. It is reasonable
to assume that, in the long run, wages and prices are flexible rather than sticky, and
people accurately perceive relative prices. Each of the three theories explains not
only a short-run aggregate-supply curve that slopes upward but also a long-run
aggregate-supply curve that is vertical.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 727

13/09/22 6:46 PM

728

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

34-4e Why the Short-Run Aggregate-Supply Curve Might Shift
The short-run aggregate-supply curve depicts the quantity of goods and services
supplied in the short run for any level of prices. It is similar to the long-run aggregatesupply curve, but it is upward-sloping rather than vertical because of sticky wages,
sticky prices, and misperceptions. When thinking about what shifts the short-run
aggregate-supply curve, we have to consider all the variables that shift the long-run
aggregate-supply curve, plus an additional one: the expected price level. It influences the wages that are stuck, the prices that are stuck, and the perceptions about
relative prices that may be flawed.
Let’s start with what we know about the long-run aggregate-supply curve. As
we have discussed, shifts in the long-run aggregate-supply curve normally arise
from changes in labor, capital, natural resources, or technological knowledge. These
variables also shift the short-run aggregate-supply curve. For example, when an
increase in the capital stock raises productivity, the economy can produce more output, so both the long-run and short-run aggregate-supply curves shift to the right.
When large sectoral shifts raise the natural rate of unemployment, the economy
has fewer employed workers and produces less output, so both the long-run and
short-run aggregate-supply curves shift to the left.
The new variable that affects the position of the short-run aggregate-supply
curve is the price level that people expected to prevail. As we have discussed, the
quantity of goods and services supplied depends, in the short run, on sticky wages,
sticky prices, and misperceptions. Yet wages, prices, and perceptions are set based
on the expected price level. So when the expected price level changes, the short-run
aggregate-supply curve shifts.
For example, the sticky-wage theory says that workers and firms agree on a level
of nominal wages based on their expectations about the price level. The expected
price level, therefore, affects firms’ costs and, for any actual price level, the quantity
of goods and services supplied. When the expected price level rises, wages are set
higher, costs increase, and firms produce a smaller quantity of goods and services at
any actual price level. Thus, the short-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to the left.
Conversely, when the expected price level falls, wages are set lower, costs decline,
firms increase output at any actual price level, and the short-run aggregate-supply
curve shifts to the right.
A similar logic applies in each of the theories of aggregate supply. The general
lesson is the following: An increase in the expected price level reduces the quantity of goods and services supplied and shifts the short-run aggregate-supply
curve to the left. A decrease in the expected price level raises the quantity of
goods and services supplied and shifts the short-run aggregate-supply curve
to the right.
As the next section shows, the influence of expectations on the position of the
short-run aggregate-supply curve plays a key role in explaining how the economy
makes the transition from the short run to the long run. In the short run, expectations are fixed, and the economy finds itself at the intersection of the aggregatedemand curve and the short-run aggregate-supply curve. Over time, if the price
level differs from what people expected, expectations change, and the short-run
aggregate-supply curve shifts. This shift ensures that, in the long run, the economy moves to the intersection of the aggregate-demand curve and the long-run
aggregate-supply curve.
Table 2 summarizes what we’ve learned about the short-run aggregate-supply
curve.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 728

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

729

Table 2
The Short-Run AggregateSupply Curve: Summary

Why Does the Short-Run Aggregate-Supply Curve Slope Upward?

1. The Sticky-Wage Theory: An unexpectedly low price level, for given nominal
wages, causes firms to hire fewer workers and produce a smaller quantity of
goods and services.
2. The Sticky-Price Theory: An unexpectedly low price level leaves some firms
with higher-than-desired prices, depressing their sales and leading them to cut
back production.
3. The Misperceptions Theory: An unexpectedly low price level leads some
suppliers to think their relative prices have fallen, inducing a fall in production.
Why Might the Short-Run Aggregate-Supply Curve Shift?

1. Shifts Arising from Changes in Labor: An increase in the quantity of labor
available (perhaps due to a fall in the natural rate of unemployment) shifts the
aggregate-supply curve to the right. A decrease in the quantity of labor available
(perhaps due to a rise in the natural rate of unemployment) shifts
the aggregate-supply curve to the left.
2. Shifts Arising from Changes in Capital: An increase in physical or human
capital shifts the aggregate-supply curve to the right. A decrease in physical
or human capital shifts the aggregate-supply curve to the left.
3. Shifts Arising from Changes in Natural Resources: An increase in the availability
of natural resources shifts the aggregate-supply curve to the right. A decrease in
the availability of natural resources shifts the aggregate-supply curve to the left.
4. Shifts Arising from Changes in Technology: An advance in technological
knowledge shifts the aggregate-supply curve to the right. A decrease in
the available technology (perhaps due to government regulation) shifts the
aggregate-supply curve to the left.
5. Shifts Arising from Changes in the Expected Price Level: A decrease in the expected
price level shifts the short-run aggregate-supply curve to the right. An increase
in the expected price level shifts the short-run aggregate-supply curve to the left.

QuickQuiz
8. One reason the short-run aggregate-supply curve
slopes upward is that a higher price level
a. raises nominal wages if real wages are sticky.
b. reduces nominal wages if real wages are sticky.
c. raises real wages if nominal wages are sticky.
d. reduces real wages if nominal wages are sticky.

9. A change in which of the following would shift the
short-run aggregate-supply curve but not the long-run
aggregate-supply curve?
a. the labor force
b. the capital stock
c. the state of technology
d. the expected price level
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

34-5 Two Causes of Economic Fluctuations
Let’s now use the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply to examine the
two basic causes of short-run fluctuations: shifts in aggregate demand and shifts
in aggregate supply.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 729

13/09/22 6:46 PM

730

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

To keep things simple, assume the economy begins in long-run equilibrium,
as shown in Figure 7. Output and the price level are determined in the long run
by the intersection of the aggregate-demand curve and the long-run aggregatesupply curve, shown as point A in the figure. At this point, output is at its natural
level. Because the economy is always in a short-run equilibrium, the short-run
aggregate-supply curve passes through this point as well, indicating that the
expected price level has adjusted to this long-run equilibrium. That is, when
an economy is in its long-run equilibrium, the expected price level equals the
actual price level so the intersection of aggregate demand with short-run aggregate supply is the same as the intersection of aggregate demand with long-run
aggregate supply.

34-5a The Effects of a Shift in Aggregate Demand
Suppose that a wave of pessimism overtakes the economy. The cause might be a
scandal in the White House, a crash in the stock market, or the outbreak of war
overseas. Whatever the specific reason, many people lose confidence in the future
and alter their plans. Households cut back on their spending and delay major purchases, and firms put off buying new equipment.
What is the macroeconomic impact of such a wave of pessimism? To answer
this question, let’s follow the three steps introduced in Chapter 4 for analyzing
supply and demand. First, determine whether the event affects aggregate demand
or aggregate supply. Second, determine the direction in which the curve shifts.
Third, use the diagram of aggregate demand and aggregate supply to compare the
initial and new equilibria. The new wrinkle is that we need to add a fourth step:
We have to keep track of a new short-run equilibrium, a new long-run equilibrium,
and the transition between them. Table 3 summarizes the four steps for analyzing
economic fluctuations.

Figure 7
The Long-Run Equilibrium
The long-run equilibrium of
the economy is found where
the aggregate-demand curve
crosses the long-run aggregatesupply curve (point A). When
the economy reaches this longrun equilibrium, the expected
price level will have adjusted
to equal the actual price level.
As a result, the short-run
aggregate-supply curve crosses
this point as well.

Price
Level
Long-run
aggregate
supply

A

Equilibrium
price

Aggregate
demand
0

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 730

Short-run
aggregate
supply

Natural level
of output

Quantity of
Output

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

731

Table 3
Four Steps for Analyzing
Macroeconomic Fluctuations

1. Decide whether the event shifts the aggregate-demand curve or the
aggregate-supply curve (or perhaps both).
2. Decide the direction in which the curve shifts.
3. Use the diagram of aggregate demand and aggregate supply to determine
the impact on output and the price level in the short run.
4. Use the diagram of aggregate demand and aggregate supply to analyze how
the economy moves from its new short-run equilibrium to its new long-run
equilibrium.

The first two steps are straightforward. First, because the wave of pessimism
affects spending plans, it affects the aggregate-demand curve. Second, because
households and firms now want to buy a smaller quantity of goods and services
for any price level, the event reduces aggregate demand. As Figure 8 shows, the
aggregate-demand curve shifts to the left from AD1 to AD2.
Using this figure, we can perform step three: By comparing the initial and new
equilibria, we can see the effects of the fall in aggregate demand. In the short
run, the economy moves along the initial short-run aggregate-supply curve, AS1,
going from point A to point B. As the economy moves between these two points,
output falls from Y1 to Y2, and the price level falls from P1 to P2. The decline in
output indicates that the economy is in a recession. Although not shown in the

Figure 8
A Contraction in Aggregate
Demand
A fall in aggregate demand is
represented by a leftward shift in
the aggregate-demand curve from
AD1 to AD2. In the short run, the
economy moves from point A to
point B. Output falls from Y1 to
Y2, and the price level falls from
P1 to P2. But as the expected
price level adjusts, the short-run
aggregate-supply curve shifts to
the right from AS1 to AS2, and
the economy reaches point C,
where the new aggregate-demand
curve crosses the long-run
aggregate-supply curve. In the
long run, the price level falls
to P3, and output returns to its
natural level, Y1.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 731

2. . . . causes output to fall in the short run . . .
Price
Level
Long-run
aggregate
supply

Short-run aggregate
supply, AS1
AS2
3. . . . but over
time, the short-run
aggregate-supply
curve shifts . . .

A

P1
B

P2
P3

1. A decrease in
aggregate demand . . .

C

AD2
0

Y2

Y1

Aggregate
demand, AD1

4. . . . and output returns
to its natural level.

Quantity of
Output

13/09/22 6:46 PM

732

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

figure, firms respond to lower sales and production by reducing employment.
The pessimism that caused the shift in aggregate demand is, to some extent,
self-fulfilling: Pessimism about the future leads to falling incomes and rising
unemployment.
Now comes step four—the transition from the short-run equilibrium to the
new long-run equilibrium. Because of the reduction in aggregate demand, the
price level initially falls from P1 to P2. The price level is below the level that people
were expecting (P1) before the sudden fall in aggregate demand. People can be
surprised in the short run, but they will not remain surprised forever. Eventually,
their expectations catch up with the new reality. The expected price level falls,
altering wages, prices, and perceptions, and these changes, in turn, affect the
position of the short-run aggregate-supply curve. For example, according to the
sticky-wage theory, once workers and firms come to expect a lower level of prices,
they agree on lower nominal wages; the reduction in labor costs encourages firms
to hire more workers and expand production at any level of prices. In this way,
the fall in the expected price level shifts the short-run aggregate-supply curve to
the right from AS1 to AS2 in Figure 8. This shift allows the economy to approach
point C, where the new aggregate-demand curve (AD2) crosses the long-run
aggregate-supply curve.
In the new long-run equilibrium, point C, output is back to its natural level. The
economy has corrected itself: The decline in output is reversed in the long run, even
without action by policymakers. Although the wave of pessimism has reduced
aggregate demand, the price level has fallen sufficiently (to P3) to offset the shift
in the aggregate-demand curve, and people have come to expect this new lower
price level as well. In the long run, the shift in aggregate demand is reflected fully
in the price level and not at all in the level of output. In other words, the long-run
effect of a shift in aggregate demand is a nominal change (the price level is lower)
but not a real change (output is the same).
What should policymakers do when faced with a sudden fall in aggregate
demand? This analysis assumed they did nothing. But another possibility is
that, as soon as the economy heads into recession (moving from point A to
point B), policymakers take action to increase aggregate demand. As we noted
earlier, an increase in government spending or an increase in the money supply would increase the quantity of goods and services demanded at any price
and thereby shift the aggregate-demand curve to the right. If policymakers act
with sufficient speed and precision, they can offset the initial shift in aggregate
demand, return the aggregate-demand curve to AD1, and bring the economy
back to point A. If the policy is successful, the painful period of depressed output and employment can be reduced in length and severity. The next chapter
discusses in more detail the ways in which monetary and fiscal policy influence
aggregate demand, as well as some of the practical difficulties in using these
policy instruments.
To sum up, this story about shifts in aggregate demand has three important
lessons:
●

●

●

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 732

In the short run, shifts in aggregate demand cause fluctuations in the economy’s output of goods and services.
In the long run, shifts in aggregate demand affect the overall price level but
do not affect output.
Because policymakers influence aggregate demand, they can potentially
mitigate the severity of economic fluctuations.

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

733

Monetary Neutrality Revisited

A

ccording to classical economic theory, money is neutral. That is,
changes in the quantity of money affect nominal variables such as the
price level but not real variables such as output. Earlier in this chapter,
we noted that most economists accept this conclusion as a description
of how the economy works in the long run but not in the short run. Using
the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply, we can explain
this conclusion more fully.
Suppose that the Fed reduces the quantity of money in the economy.
What effect does this change have? As discussed, the money supply is
one determinant of aggregate demand. The reduction in the money supply
shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the left.
The analysis looks just like Figure 8. Even though the cause of the shift
in aggregate demand is different, we would observe the same effects on

Case
Study

output and the price level. In the short run, both output and the price level
fall. The economy has a recession. But over time, the expected price level
falls as well. Firms and workers respond to their new expectations by, for
instance, agreeing to lower nominal wages. As they do so, the short-run
aggregate-supply curve shifts to the right. Eventually, the economy finds
itself back on the long-run aggregate-supply curve.
Figure 8 shows when money matters for real variables and when
it does not. In the long run, money is neutral, as represented by the
movement of the economy from point A to point C. But in the short run,
a change in the money supply has real effects, as represented by the
movement of the economy from point A to point B. An old saying summarizes the analysis: “Money is a veil, but when the veil flutters, real
output sputters.” ■

Two Big Shifts in Aggregate Demand: The Great
Depression and World War II

This chapter began by establishing three facts about economic fluctuations using data since 1972. Let’s now take a longer look at U.S.
economic history. Figure 9 shows data since 1900 on the percentage change in real
GDP over the previous three years. In an average 3-year period, real GDP grows
about 10 percent—a bit more than 3 percent per year. The business cycle, however,
causes fluctuations around this average. Two episodes jump out from this figure
as being particularly significant: the large drop in real GDP in the early 1930s and
the large increase in the early 1940s. Shifts in aggregate demand caused both of
these events.
The economic calamity of the early 1930s is called the Great Depression, and it
is by far the largest economic downturn in U.S. history. Real GDP fell by 26 percent
from 1929 to 1933, and unemployment rose from 3 percent to 25 percent. At the
same time, the price level fell by 22 percent over these four years. Many other countries experienced similar declines in output and prices during this period.
Economic historians continue to debate the causes of the Great Depression, but
most explanations center on a large decline in aggregate demand. What caused
aggregate demand to contract? Here is where the disagreement arises.
Many economists place primary blame on the decline in the money supply:
From 1929 to 1933, it fell by 28 percent. As you may recall from our discussion of
the monetary system, this decline in the money supply stemmed from problems in
the banking system. As households withdrew their money from financially shaky
banks and bankers became more cautious and started holding greater reserves, the
process of money creation under fractional-reserve banking went into reverse. The
Fed, meanwhile, failed to offset this fall in the money multiplier with expansionary
open-market operations, so the money supply declined. Many economists blame
the Fed’s inaction for the Great Depression’s severity.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 733

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

734

Over the course of U.S. economic history, two fluctuations stand out as especially
large. During the early 1930s, the economy endured the Great Depression, when the
production of goods and services plummeted. During the early 1940s, the United
States entered World War II, and production rose rapidly. Both events are usually
explained by large shifts in aggregate demand.

Figure 9
U.S. Real GDP Growth since 1900

Source: Louis D. Johnston and Samuel H. Williamson, “What Was GDP Then?” http://www.measuringworth.com/usgdp/; Department of Commerce.

Percent Change
in Real GDP from
3 Years Earlier
70
The Great
Depression

60

The World War II
Boom

50
40

Three-year percent change

30

Average
Growth

20
10
0
–10
–20

BETTMANN/GETTY IMAGES

–30

1900

1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

2010

2020

Some economists have suggested other reasons for the collapse in
aggregate demand. For example, stock prices fell about 90 percent
during this period, depressing household wealth and consumer
spending. In addition, the banking problems may have prevented
some firms from obtaining the financing they wanted for new projects
and business expansions, reducing investment spending. It is possible
that all these forces acted together to contract aggregate demand.
The second significant episode in Figure 9—the rapid economic
expansion of the early 1940s—is easier to explain. World War II caused
the boom. As the United States entered the war overseas, the federal
government devoted more resources to the military. Government purchases of goods and services increased almost fivefold from 1939 to
The outcome of a massive decrease in
1944. This huge expansion in aggregate demand almost doubled the
aggregate demand
economy’s production of goods and services and led to a 20 percent
increase in the price level (although government price controls limited
the rise in prices). Unemployment fell from 17 percent in 1939 to about 1 percent in
1944—the lowest level in U.S. history. ●

Case
Study

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 734

The Great Recession of 2008–2009
In 2008 and 2009, the U.S. economy experienced a financial crisis and
severe downturn in economic activity. In many ways, it was the worst
macroeconomic event in more than half a century.

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

735

The story of this downturn begins a few years earlier with a boom in the housing
market that was partly fueled by low interest rates. In the aftermath of the recession
of 2001, the Fed dropped rates to historically low levels. These low interest rates
helped the economy recover, but by making it less expensive to get a mortgage and
buy a home, they contributed to a rise in house prices.
In addition to low interest rates, changes in the mortgage market made it easier
for subprime borrowers—those with a higher risk of default based on their income
and credit history—to get loans to buy homes. One development was securitization, the process by which a financial institution (specifically, a mortgage originator)
makes loans and then (with the help of an investment bank) bundles them together
into financial instruments called mortgage-backed securities. These mortgagebacked securities were then sold to other institutions (such as banks and insurance
companies), which may not have fully appreciated the risks in these securities.
Some economists blame inadequate regulation for these high-risk loans. Others
blame government policies that encouraged this lending to make homeownership
more attainable for low-income families. Together, these forces drove up housing
demand and house prices. From 1995 to 2006, average house prices in the United
States more than doubled.
Those prices proved unsustainable. From 2006 to 2009, house prices nationwide
fell about 30 percent. Such price fluctuations are not necessarily a problem in a
market economy. After all, price movements are how markets equilibrate supply
and demand. In this case, however, the price decline had two repercussions that
led to a large fall in aggregate demand.
The first was a rise in mortgage defaults and home foreclosures. During the
housing boom, many people bought their homes with mostly borrowed money
and minimal down payments. When house prices declined, these homeowners
were underwater (they owed more on their mortgages than their homes were
worth). Many of these homeowners stopped repaying their loans. The banks servicing the mortgages responded to these defaults by taking the houses away in
foreclosure procedures and then selling them off. The banks’ goal was to recoup
whatever they could from the bad loans. But the increase in the supply of houses
for sale exacerbated the downward spiral of house prices. As house prices fell,
spending on residential construction collapsed.
A second repercussion was that financial institutions that owned mortgagebacked securities suffered large losses. In essence, by borrowing large sums to
buy high-risk mortgages, these companies had bet that house prices would keep
rising; when this bet turned bad, they found themselves at or near bankruptcy.
Because of these losses, many financial institutions did not have funds to loan out,
and the ability of the financial system to channel resources to those who could best
use them was impaired. Even creditworthy customers found themselves unable to
borrow to finance investment spending. Such an event is called a credit crunch.
As a result of the residential investment collapse and credit crunch, the
economy experienced a contractionary shift in aggregate demand. Real GDP and
employment both fell sharply. The figures cited in this chapter’s introduction are
worth repeating: Real GDP declined by 4.0 percent between the fourth quarter of
2007 and the second quarter of 2009, and the rate of unemployment rose from 4.4
percent in May 2007 to 10.0 percent in October 2009. This experience served as a
vivid reminder that deep economic downturns and the personal hardship they
cause are not relics of history but a constant risk in the modern economy.
As the crisis unfolded, the U.S. government responded in various ways. Three
policy actions—all aimed in part at returning aggregate demand to its previous
level—are most noteworthy.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 735

13/09/22 6:46 PM

736

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

First, the Fed cut its target for the federal funds rate from 5.25 percent in
September 2007 to about zero in December 2008. In addition, in a policy called
quantitative easing, the Fed started buying mortgage-backed securities and other
long-term debt in open-market operations. The goals of quantitative easing were to
lower long-term interest rates and to provide the financial system with additional
funds so banks would make loans more readily available.
Second, in an even more unusual move in October 2008, Congress appropriated $700 billion for the Treasury to use to rescue the financial system. Much of
this money was injected into banks as capital. That is, the Treasury put funds
into the banking system, which the banks could use to make loans and otherwise continue normal operations; in exchange for these funds, the U.S. government became a part owner of these banks, at least temporarily. The policy’s
goal was to stem the crisis on Wall Street and make it easier for businesses and
individuals to borrow.
Finally, when Barack Obama became president in January 2009, his first major
initiative was a large increase in government spending. After a brief congressional
debate, he signed a $787 billion stimulus bill on February 17, 2009.
The recovery from this recession began in June 2009, but it was meager by historical standards. Over the next seven years, real GDP growth averaged only 2.2
percent per year, well below the average rate of growth over the past half century
of about 3 percent. The unemployment rate did not fall below 5.0 percent until 2016.
Which of the policy moves were most important for ending the recession? What
other policies might have promoted a more robust recovery? Macroeconomic historians continue to debate these questions. ●

34-5b The Effects of a Shift in Aggregate Supply

stagflation
a period of falling output
and rising prices

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 736

Imagine once again an economy in long-run equilibrium. Now suppose that the
costs of production suddenly increase for some firms. For example, bad weather
in farm states might destroy crops, driving up the cost of food products. Or a war
in the Middle East might interrupt the shipping of crude oil, driving up the cost of
oil-intensive goods.
To analyze the macroeconomic impact of such an increase in production costs,
follow the same four steps as always. First, which curve is affected? Because
production costs affect the firms that supply goods and services, changes in production costs alter the position of the aggregate-supply curve. Second, in which
direction does the curve shift? Because higher production costs make selling goods
and services less profitable, firms now supply a smaller quantity of output for
any price level. As Figure 10 shows, the short-run aggregate-supply curve shifts
to the left, from AS1 to AS2. (Depending on the event, the long-run aggregatesupply curve might also shift. To keep things simple, however, we will assume
that it does not.)
The figure allows us to perform step three of comparing the initial and new
equilibria. In the short run, the economy goes from point A to point B, moving
along the existing aggregate-demand curve. The output of the economy falls from
Y1 to Y2, and the price level rises from P1 to P2. Because the economy is experiencing both stagnation (falling output) and inflation (rising prices), such an event is
sometimes called stagflation.
Now consider step four—the transition from the short-run equilibrium to
the long-run equilibrium. According to the sticky-wage theory, the key issue is
how stagflation affects nominal wages. Firms and workers may, at first, respond
to the higher level of prices by raising their expectations of the price level and

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

Figure 10
An Adverse Shift in
Aggregate Supply
When some event increases
firms’ costs, the short-run
aggregate-supply curve shifts
to the left from AS1 to AS2.
The economy moves from
point A to point B. The result
is stagflation: Output falls
from Y1 to Y2, and the price
level rises from P1 to P2.

737

1. An adverse shift in the shortrun aggregate-supply curve . . .
Price
Level
Long-run
aggregate
supply

AS2

Short-run
aggregate
supply, AS1

B

P2

A

P1
3. . . . and
the price
level to rise.

Aggregate demand
0

Y2

Y1

2. . . . causes output to fall . . .

Quantity of
Output

setting higher nominal wages. In this case, firms’ costs will rise yet again, and
the short-run aggregate-supply curve will shift farther to the left, making the
problem of stagflation even worse. This phenomenon of higher prices leading
to higher wages, which in turn leads to even higher prices, is sometimes called
a wage-price spiral.
At some point, the spiral of ever-rising wages and prices will slow. The low level
of output and employment will put downward pressure on wages because workers have less bargaining power when unemployment is high. As nominal wages
fall, producing goods and services becomes more profitable, and the short-run
aggregate-supply curve shifts to the right. As it shifts back toward AS1, the price
level falls, and the quantity of output approaches its natural level. In the long run,
the economy returns to point A, where the aggregate-demand curve crosses the
long-run aggregate-supply curve.
This transition back to the initial equilibrium assumes, however, that aggregate demand is held constant throughout the process. In the real world, that
may not be the case. Monetary and fiscal policymakers might attempt to offset
some of the effects of the shift in the short-run aggregate-supply curve by shifting the aggregate-demand curve. This possibility is shown in Figure 11. In this
case, changes in policy shift the aggregate-demand curve to the right, from AD1
to AD2—exactly enough to prevent the shift in aggregate supply from affecting
output. The economy moves directly from point A to point C. Output remains at
its natural level, and the price level rises from P1 to P3. In this case, policymakers
are said to accommodate the shift in aggregate supply. An accommodative policy
accepts a permanently higher level of prices to maintain a higher level of output
and employment.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 737

13/09/22 6:46 PM

738

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Figure 11

1. When short-run aggregate
supply falls . . .

Accommodating an Adverse
Shift in Aggregate Supply

Price
Level

Faced with an adverse shift
in aggregate supply from
AS1 to AS2, policymakers
who can influence aggregate
demand might try to shift
the aggregate-demand curve
to the right from AD1 to AD2.
The economy would move
from point A to point C. This
policy would prevent the
supply shift from reducing
output in the short run,
but the price level would
permanently rise from
P1 to P3.

Long-run
aggregate
supply

P3

C

P2
3. . . . which
causes the
price level
to rise
further . . .

A

P1

4. . . . but keeps output
at its natural level.
0

Natural level
of output

Short-run
aggregate
supply, AS1

AS2

2. . . . policymakers can
accommodate the shift
by expanding aggregate
demand . . .
AD2
Aggregate demand, AD1
Quantity of
Output

To sum up, this story about shifts in aggregate supply has two important lessons:
●

●

Shifts in aggregate supply can cause stagflation—a combination of recession
(falling output) and inflation (rising prices).
Policymakers who can influence aggregate demand can mitigate the adverse
impact on output but only at the cost of exacerbating the problem of inflation.

Case
Study

Oil and the Economy

Some of the largest economic fluctuations in the U.S. economy since 1970
originated in the oil fields of the Middle East. Crude oil is an input into
the production of many goods and services, and much of the world’s oil
comes from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and other Middle Eastern countries. When some
event (often political in origin) reduces the supply of crude oil flowing from this
region, the price of oil rises around the world. Firms in the United States that produce
gasoline, tires, and many other products experience rising costs, so they find it less
profitable to supply their output of goods and services at any price level. The result
is a leftward shift in the aggregate-supply curve, which, in turn, leads to stagflation.
The first episode of this sort occurred in the mid-1970s. The countries with large
oil reserves started to exert their influence on the world economy as members of
OPEC, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. OPEC is a cartel—
a group of sellers that attempts to thwart competition and reduce production
to raise prices. And indeed, oil prices rose substantially. From 1973 to 1975, oil
approximately doubled in price. Oil-importing countries around the world experienced simultaneous inflation and recession. The U.S. inflation rate as measured
by the CPI exceeded 10 percent for the first time in decades. Unemployment rose
from 4.9 percent in 1973 to 8.5 percent in 1975.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 738

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

739

YASSER AL-ZAYYAT/AFP/GETTY IMAGES

Almost the same thing happened a few years later. In the late 1970s, the OPEC
countries again restricted the supply of oil. From 1978 to 1981, the price of oil more
than doubled. Once again, the result was stagflation. Inflation, which had subsided
somewhat after the first OPEC event, again rose above 10 percent per year. But
because the Fed was not willing to accommodate such a large rise in inflation, a
recession soon followed. Unemployment rose from about 6 percent in 1978 and
1979 to about 10 percent a few years later.
Developments in the world market for oil can also be a source of favorable
shifts in aggregate supply. In 1986, squabbling broke out among members of
OPEC. Member countries reneged on their agreements to restrict oil production.
In the world market for crude oil, prices fell by about half. This fall in
oil prices reduced costs to U.S. firms, which now found it more profitable to supply goods and services at any price level. As a result, the
aggregate-supply curve shifted to the right. The U.S. economy experienced the opposite of stagflation: Output grew rapidly, unemployment
fell, and the inflation rate reached its lowest level in many years.
In recent years, developments in the world oil market have not been
as important a source of fluctuations for the U.S. economy. One reason
is that conservation efforts, advancing technology, and the increased
availability of alternative energy sources have reduced the economy’s
dependence on oil. The amount of oil used to produce a unit of real
GDP has declined by more than 60 percent since the OPEC shocks of
Changes in Middle East oil production
the 1970s. As a result, the impact of any change in oil prices on the U.S.
are one source of U.S. economic
economy is smaller today than it was in the past. ●
fluctuations.

The Origins of the Model of Aggregate Demand
and Aggregate Supply

N

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 739

KEYSTONE/HULTON ARCHIVE/GETTY IMAGES

ow that we have seen the model of
aggregate demand and aggregate
supply, let’s step back and consider its
history. How did this model of short-run
fluctuations develop? The answer is that
this model is largely a by-product of the
Great Depression of the 1930s. Economists
and policymakers at the time were puzzled
about what had caused this calamity and
were uncertain about how to deal with it.
John Maynard Keynes
In 1936, the economist John Maynard
Keynes published The General Theory
of Employment, Interest, and Money, a landmark book that attempted
to explain short-run economic fluctuations in general and the Great
Depression in particular. Keynes’s main message was that recessions
and depressions can occur because of inadequate aggregate demand
for goods and services.

Keynes had long been a critic of classical economic theory because
it could explain only the long-run effects of policies. A few years before
offering The General Theory, Keynes had written the following about classical economics:
The long run is a misleading guide to current affairs. In the
long run we are all dead. Economists set themselves too easy,
too useless a task if in tempestuous seasons they can only
tell us when the storm is long past, the ocean will be flat.

Keynes’s message was aimed at policymakers as well as economists. As
the world’s economies suffered from high unemployment, Keynes advocated
policies to increase aggregate demand, including government spending
on public works.
The next chapter examines in detail how policymakers can use the
tools of monetary and fiscal policy to influence aggregate demand. The
analysis in that chapter, as well as in this one, owes much to the legacy
of John Maynard Keynes. ■

13/09/22 6:46 PM

740

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Case
Study

The Covid Recession of 2020

In 2020, the U.S. economy and most others around the world experienced a downturn with three unusual features.
The first was its cause: the Covid-19 pandemic. This infectious and
dangerous virus initially appeared in China in late 2019 and then in the United
States in early 2020. To slow its spread, health experts advised people to avoid
close interactions with others. Elected leaders ordered large segments of the
economy to be closed, including movie theaters, sporting events, concerts, restaurants (except for take-out), and non-essential retail stores. Commercial air travel
stopped almost completely.
The second unusual feature of the 2020 downturn was its speed and depth. From
February 2020 to April 2020, employment in the United States fell from 61.1 percent
of the adult population to 51.3 percent—by far the largest two-month drop ever
recorded. The unemployment rate in April 2020 was 14.8 percent, the highest level
since the Great Depression.
The third unusual feature of this downturn was that, in a sense, it was intentional. Most recessions are accidents: Some unexpected event shifts aggregate

In the
News

The Strange Downturn of 2020

The economic events that resulted
from the Covid-19 pandemic were not
at all typical.

The Unusual Covid Recession
By Austan Goolsbee

A

mericans everywhere remain concerned
about getting past what feels like a neverending litany of Covid-19-induced economic
problems, from out-of-stock products to inflation and continued fears of exposure to illness
when going out. When will it finally end?
Professional economic forecasters are
struggling to answer this question.
Many are turning to previous recessions as
a guide to how things will go. But one of the
most important things to understand is that
while the pandemic created a collapse—and
for some even an economic disaster—it really
wasn’t a recession in the normal sense.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 740

That sounds strange. Indeed, the arbiter of
these things, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, declared that the United States had
a two-month recession in March and April 2020.
But past business cycles look nothing like
what the United States has gone through in
the pandemic, so they are the wrong place to
find lessons for where things are going now.
The causes of recessions vary, but they
follow a basic pattern: The hardest-hit industries are the cyclically sensitive sectors where
demand dries up. Those sectors include sales
of big-ticket items like furniture, construction
materials, appliances and cars, as the Bureau
of Labor Statistics and others have documented. These are purchases that can be delayed
when times are bad. Recoveries begin when
demand returns to these cyclical industries,
when prices fall enough or interest rates get
cut enough or pent-up needs build sufficiently
for demand to return.
Recessions have much smaller impacts on
noncyclical industries like hospitals, nursing

care, gas and electric utilities, and the like.
Demand there is steady regardless of the cycle.
Some service sector industries, like education, see demand rise in recessions.
None of these familiar patterns held during the pandemic economic collapse. Spending
on consumer durables went up. Indeed, sales
of TVs with screens larger than 65 inches rose
77 percent from April to June 2020, compared
to the year before, as the bottom dropped
out of the economy. Watching TV was one of
the few things people could still do during
lockdown. Demand for other cyclical industry
goods like housing and construction materials
boomed too.
During the pandemic downturn, Americans
also reversed a decades-long trend toward
spending on services rather than goods. For
75 years, consumers in the United States have
been spending less and less of their money on
physical goods (from 60 percent of spending
in the 1940s to 31 percent in 2019). Counter
to this trend (and contrasting with previous

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

741

supply or aggregate demand, reducing production and employment. When this
occurs, policymakers usually want to return the economy to normal levels of
production and employment as quickly as possible. By contrast, the 2020 downturn was a recession by design. To curb the Covid-19 pandemic, policymakers
compelled changes in behavior that reduced production and employment. Of
course, the pandemic itself was neither intended nor desired. But given the circumstances, a large, temporary decline in economic activity was arguably the best
possible outcome.
The economic downturn of 2020 can be interpreted using the model of aggregate
supply and aggregate demand. Consider first aggregate demand. Starting in March
2020, many places where people normally buy things, such as restaurants and retail
stores, were closed by government decree. And people avoided many businesses
that remained open to reduce the risk of infection. As a result, the quantity of goods
and services demanded was lower at every price level. The aggregate demand
curve shifted to the left.
Now consider aggregate supply. When the health crisis caused many businesses
to temporarily shut down, it caused a sudden, massive reduction in the quantity
of goods and services supplied at every price level. The aggregate supply curve

recessions), the share of consumer spending
on physical goods actually jumped during the
pandemic to the highest level in 17 years and
among the biggest jumps ever recorded.
In other words, this was a recession like no
other in recent memory. The pandemic downturn
was driven by all those industries that are supposed to be recession-proof—trips to the dentist, electricity usage in offices and malls, and
so on. And the normally countercyclical education sector had big enrollment drops despite
the bad economy.
Of course, this was because of the
coronavirus. But it means that the recovery from past recessions doesn’t really say
much about how the recovery will go now.
Everyone is trying to predict when there will
be a rebound in service sector industries that
normally don’t decline, like health care, child
care and education. That’s really more of a
question about how quickly we can control the
spread of the virus than it is about recession
fundamentals.
At the same time, the unusually large
demand for physical goods in the United States

and other rich countries has exceeded supply,
driving up inflation and leading to shortages.
So the most important thing to watch if you
want to understand the economy is, as has been
the case for a year and half now, the progress
made against the virus. Related, and also worth
watching, is how much Americans spend on
goods relative to services. (It was 31 percent in
2019 and has risen to 35 percent now.)
While economic growth in the United States
was disappointing in the third quarter of 2021,
it could easily turn around if coronavirus case
numbers improve. The U.S. employment numbers released on Friday were encouraging.
New Covid-19 cases are down significantly
and millions of children are now eligible for
vaccination, which could reduce infection rates
even further.
Looking beyond the coming months, though,
the most interesting questions aren’t really
about recession and recovery. They center on
whether any of the pandemic changes will last.
Some companies, for example, are now trying
to hold more inventory and keep their supply
chains local to avoid disruption. Many people

are working partly from home and some have
moved to the exurbs. But how long before they
rediscover why we ended up with lean manufacturing and a global supply chain in the first
place? And Americans are already moving back
to cities.
My view is that reversals of longstanding economic trends are not likely to become
permanent. Once the economic memory of the
pandemic has faded, the old lessons from the
regular business cycle will probably become
relevant once more. Until that happens, though,
best to get in line for a vaccine booster and
keep your eye on the case numbers. ■

Questions to Discuss
1.

How did your family’s spending change
during the coronavirus pandemic?

2.

In your opinion, what economic policies
should the government have pursued
during the pandemic?

Mr. Goolsbee is a professor of economics at
the University of Chicago.

Source: New York Times, November 10, 2021.

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 741

13/09/22 6:46 PM

742

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

shifted to the left. The simultaneous shifts in aggregate demand and aggregate supply led to a sharp reduction in production and employment.
Once the enormity of the downturn became clear, policymakers responded
swiftly. On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act was signed into law. Together with other legislation enacted around
the same time, it authorized a combination of spending increases and tax reductions
of about $2 trillion, roughly 10 percent of GDP, making it the largest fiscal response
to a recession in history. The CARES Act is sometimes called a stimulus bill, but
the goal was not actually to end the recession by stimulating the economy. The
recession was inevitable, given the pandemic. The policy’s goal was to alleviate the
hardship people faced and to prevent the downturn from leaving permanent scars
on the economy.
A large part of the policy response might be called social insurance or disaster
relief. All households, except those with high incomes, were given tax rebates of
$1,200 per adult and $500 per child. Eligibility for unemployment insurance was
expanded, and benefits were temporarily increased by $600 per week. Small businesses were offered loans that would be forgiven and turned into grants if they did
not lay off any workers for the next two months.
To prevent permanent damage from the recession, the CARES Act had various
provisions to promote business continuity. This was part of the motivation for the
forgivable loans to small businesses. Not only did workers continue getting paychecks, but they stayed connected to their employers, so normal business could
quickly resume when the crisis passed. The CARES Act also provided funds that
enabled the Federal Reserve, working with the Treasury, to lend to larger businesses, states, and municipalities, expanding the Fed’s role as lender of last resort.
At the same time, the Fed cut its target for the federal funds rate to near zero.
In the United States, the number of daily deaths from Covid-19 peaked in late
April 2020 and then started to slowly decline. By June 2020, many restrictions on
economic activity were relaxed, leading to a quick economic rebound. The unemployment rate, after increasing from 3.5 percent in February 2020 to 14.8 percent in
April 2020, declined to 6.9 percent in October 2020.
The pandemic, however, was not over. Cases surged in January 2021 and then
again in October 2021 and January 2022.
As the pandemic persisted, subsequent legislation continued and expanded
the relief offered by the CARES Act. President Trump signed a $900 billion relief
package in December 2020, and President Biden signed a $1.9 trillion package in
March 2021.
Some economists—most notably the former Treasury Secretary Lawrence
Summers—suggested that the fiscal response was excessive. They worried that,
together with supply-chain disruptions from the pandemic, these monetary and fiscal policies might lead to excessive inflation. As measured by the CPI, the 12-month
inflation rate rose to 7.5 percent in January 2022—the highest level in 40 years.
Policymakers initially believed that this inflation surge would prove temporary.
But in March 2022, the Fed started raising interest rates to contain inflationary
pressures.
The eventual solution to this economic downturn came more from microbiology than from macroeconomics. Economic activity started to return to normal after
several vaccines were developed and distributed in 2021. But the hesitancy of large
segments of the U.S. population to get vaccinated, along with the appearance of the
new Omicron variant of the virus, delayed the pandemic’s end and slowed the pace
of economic recovery. ●

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 742

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

743

QuickQuiz
10. A sudden increase in business pessimism shifts
the aggregate-________ curve, leading to ________
output.
a. supply; lower
b. supply; higher
c. demand; lower
d. demand; higher

c. in the short run; also in the short run
d. in the long run; also in the long run
12. Stagflation is caused by a
a. leftward shift in the aggregate-demand curve.
b. rightward shift in the aggregate-demand curve.
c. leftward shift in the aggregate-supply curve.
d. rightward shift in the aggregate-supply curve.

11. An increase in the aggregate demand for goods and
services has a larger impact on output ________ and
a larger impact on the price level ________.
a. in the short run; in the long run
b. in the long run; in the short run
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

34-6 Conclusion
This chapter had two goals. First, it discussed some of the important facts about
short-run fluctuations in economic activity. Second, it introduced a basic model to
explain those fluctuations, called the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply. We continue our study of this model in the next chapter to understand more fully
what causes economic fluctuations and how policymakers might respond to them.

Chapter in a Nutshell
• All societies experience short-run economic fluctuations around long-run trends. These fluctuations are
irregular and largely unpredictable. When recessions
occur, real GDP and other measures of income, spending, and production fall, while unemployment rises.
• Classical economic theory is based on the assumption
that nominal variables such as the money supply and
the price level don’t influence real variables such as
output and employment. Most economists believe that
this assumption is accurate in the long run but not in
the short run. Economists analyze short-run economic
fluctuations using the model of aggregate demand and
aggregate supply. According to this model, the output of
goods and services and the overall level of prices adjust
to balance aggregate demand and aggregate supply.
• The aggregate-demand curve slopes downward for
three reasons. The first is the wealth effect: A lower price
level raises the real value of households’ money holdings, stimulating consumer spending. The second is the
interest-rate effect: A lower price level reduces the quantity of money households demand. As households try

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 743

to convert money into interest-bearing assets, interest
rates fall, stimulating investment spending. The third is
the exchange-rate effect: As a lower price level reduces
interest rates, the dollar depreciates in the market for
foreign-currency exchange, stimulating net exports.
• Any event or policy that raises consumption, investment, government purchases, or net exports at any
price level increases aggregate demand. Any event
or policy that reduces consumption, investment, government purchases, or net exports at any price level
decreases aggregate demand.
• The long-run aggregate-supply curve is vertical. In
the long run, the quantity of goods and services supplied depends on the economy’s labor, capital, natural
resources, and technology but not on the overall level
of prices.
• Three theories have been proposed to explain the
upward slope of the short-run aggregate-supply curve.
According to the sticky-wage theory, an unexpected fall in the price level, for given nominal wages,
induces firms to reduce employment and production.

13/09/22 6:46 PM

744

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

According to the sticky-price theory, an unexpected fall
in the price level leaves some firms with prices that are
temporarily too high, reducing their sales and causing
them to cut back production. According to the misperceptions theory, an unexpected fall in the price level
leads suppliers to mistakenly believe that their relative
prices have fallen, inducing them to reduce production. All three theories imply that output deviates from
its natural level when the actual price level deviates
from the price level that people expected.
• Events that alter the economy’s ability to produce output, such as changes in labor, capital, natural resources,
or technology, shift the short-run aggregate-supply curve
(and may shift the long-run aggregate-supply curve as
well). In addition, the position of the short-run aggregate-supply curve depends on the expected price level.

• One possible cause of economic fluctuations is a shift
in aggregate demand. When the aggregate-demand
curve shifts to the left, for instance, output and prices
fall in the short run. Over time, as a change in the
expected price level causes wages, prices, and perceptions to adjust, the short-run aggregate-supply curve
shifts to the right. This shift returns the economy to its
natural level of output at a new, lower price level.
• A second possible cause of economic fluctuations is a
shift in aggregate supply. When the short-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to the left, the effect is falling
output and rising prices—a combination called stagflation. Over time, as wages, prices, and perceptions
adjust, the short-run aggregate-supply curve shifts
back to the right, returning the price level and output
to their original levels.

Key Concepts
recession, p. 710
depression, p. 710
model of aggregate demand and
aggregate supply, p. 714

aggregate-demand curve, p. 714
aggregate-supply curve, p. 714

natural level of output, p. 722
stagflation, p. 736

Questions for Review
1. Name two macroeconomic variables that decline
when the economy goes into a recession. Name one
macroeconomic variable that rises during a recession.
2. Draw a diagram showing aggregate demand, shortrun aggregate supply, and long-run aggregate supply.
Be careful to label the axes correctly.
3. List and explain the three reasons the aggregatedemand curve slopes downward.
4. Explain why the long-run aggregate-supply curve is
vertical.

5. List and explain the three theories for why the shortrun aggregate-supply curve slopes upward.
6. What might shift the aggregate-demand curve to
the left? Use the model of aggregate demand and
aggregate supply to trace the short-run and long-run
effects of such a shift on output and the price level.
7. What might shift the aggregate-supply curve to
the left? Use the model of aggregate demand and
aggregate supply to trace the short-run and long-run
effects of such a shift on output and the price level.

Problems and Applications
1. Suppose the economy is in a long-run equilibrium.
a. Draw a diagram to illustrate the state of the
economy. Be sure to show aggregate demand,
short-run aggregate supply, and long-run
aggregate supply.
b. Now suppose that a stock market crash causes
aggregate demand to fall. Use your diagram
to show what happens to output and the price

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 744

level in the short run. What happens to the
unemployment rate?
c. Use the sticky-wage theory of aggregate supply
to explain what happens to output and the price
level in the long run (assuming no change in
policy). What role does the expected price level
play in this adjustment? Be sure to illustrate your
analysis in a graph.

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter 34 Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply

2. Explain whether each of the following events
increases, decreases, or has no effect on long-run
aggregate supply.
a. The United States experiences a wave of
immigration.
b. Congress raises the minimum wage to $15 per hour.
c. Intel invents a new and more powerful computer
chip.
d. A severe hurricane damages factories along the
East Coast.
3. Suppose an economy is in long-run equilibrium.
a. Use the model of aggregate demand and
aggregate supply to illustrate the initial
equilibrium (call it point A). Be sure to include
both short-run aggregate supply and long-run
aggregate supply.
b. The central bank raises the money supply by 5
percent. Use your diagram to show what happens
to output and the price level as the economy
moves from the initial equilibrium to the new
short-run equilibrium (call it point B).
c. Now show the new long-run equilibrium (call it
point C). What causes the economy to move from
point B to point C?
d. According to the sticky-wage theory of aggregate
supply, how do nominal wages at point A
compare with nominal wages at point B? How do
nominal wages at point A compare with nominal
wages at point C?
e. According to the sticky-wage theory of aggregate
supply, how do real wages at point A compare
with real wages at point B? How do real wages at
point A compare with real wages at point C?
f. Judging by the impact of the money supply on
nominal and real wages, is this analysis consistent
with the proposition that money has real effects in
the short run but is neutral in the long run?
4. In 1939, with the U.S. economy not yet fully
recovered from the Great Depression, President
Franklin Roosevelt proclaimed that Thanksgiving
would fall a week earlier than usual so that the
shopping period before Christmas would be longer.
(The policy was dubbed “Franksgiving.”) Explain
what President Roosevelt might have been trying to
achieve, using the model of aggregate demand and
aggregate supply.
5. Explain why the following statements are false.
a. “The aggregate-demand curve slopes downward
because it is the horizontal sum of the demand
curves for individual goods.”
b. “The long-run aggregate-supply curve is vertical
because economic forces do not affect long-run
aggregate supply.”

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 745

745

c. “If firms adjusted their prices every day, then
the short-run aggregate-supply curve would be
horizontal.”
d. “Whenever the economy enters a recession, its
long-run aggregate-supply curve shifts to the left.”
6. For each of the three theories for the upward slope
of the short-run aggregate-supply curve, carefully
explain the following:
a. how the economy recovers from a recession and
returns to its long-run equilibrium without any
policy intervention
b. what determines the speed of that recovery
7. The economy begins in long-run equilibrium. Then,
one day, the president appoints a new Fed chair, who
is well known for holding the view that inflation is
not a major problem for an economy.
a. How would this news affect the price level that
people expect to prevail?
b. How would this change in the expected price level
affect the nominal wage that workers and firms
agree to in their new labor contracts?
c. How would this change in the nominal wage
affect the profitability of producing goods and
services at any price level?
d. How would this change in profitability affect the
short-run aggregate-supply curve?
e. If aggregate demand is held constant, how would
this shift in the aggregate-supply curve affect the
price level and the quantity of output produced?
f. Do you think appointing this Fed chair was a
good decision?
8. Explain whether each of the following events shifts
the short-run aggregate-supply curve, the aggregatedemand curve, both, or neither. For each event that
does shift a curve, draw a diagram to illustrate the
effect on the economy.
a. Households decide to save a larger share of their
income.
b. Florida orange groves suffer a prolonged period of
below-freezing temperatures.
c. Increased job opportunities overseas cause many
people to leave the country.
9. For each of the following events, explain the shortrun and long-run effects on output and the price
level, assuming policymakers take no action.
a. The stock market declines sharply, reducing
consumers’ wealth.
b. The federal government increases spending on
national defense.
c. A technological improvement raises productivity.
d. A recession overseas causes foreigners to buy
fewer U.S. goods.

13/09/22 6:46 PM

746

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

now, assume there is no change in the long-run
aggregate-supply curve.) Explain in words why
the aggregate quantity of output demanded
changes between the short run and the long run.
c. How might the investment boom affect the longrun aggregate-supply curve? Explain.

10. Suppose firms become optimistic about future business
conditions and invest heavily in new capital equipment.
a. Draw an aggregate-demand/aggregate-supply
diagram to show the short-run effect of this
optimism on the economy. Label the new levels of
prices and real output. Explain in words why the
aggregate quantity of output supplied changes.
b. Now use the diagram from part (a) to show the
new long-run equilibrium of the economy. (For

QuickQuiz Answers
1. c

22718_Ch34_ptg01.indd 746

2. d

3. c

4. a

5. b

6. b

7. d

8. d

9. d

10. c

11. a

12. c

13/09/22 6:46 PM

Chapter

35

AZMANJAKA/E+/GETTY IMAGES; CARLOS FLORES/EYEEM/GETTY IMAGES

The Influence
of Monetary and
Fiscal Policy
on Aggregate
Demand

magine that you are a member of the Federal Open Market
Committee, the group at the Federal Reserve that sets monetary policy. You observe that the president and Congress are
raising taxes to reduce the budget deficit. How should the Fed
respond to this change in fiscal policy? Should monetary policy
be expansionary, contractionary, or unchanged?
To answer this question, we will need to consider the impact of
monetary and fiscal policy on the economy. The preceding chapter
used the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply to
explain short-run economic fluctuations. We saw that shifts in the
aggregate-demand curve or the aggregate-supply curve cause fluctuations in the overall output of goods and services and the level
of prices. As we noted, both monetary and fiscal policy influence
aggregate demand, so a change in one of these policies can lead
to short-run fluctuations in output and prices. Policymakers may
want to adjust the other policy in response.
This chapter examines in greater detail how government policy
tools influence the position of the aggregate-demand curve. These
tools include monetary policy (the open-market operations conducted by the central bank and the interest rate it pays on reserves)
and fiscal policy (the levels of government spending and taxation
set by the president and Congress). We have already discussed the
long-run effects of these policies. Chapters 26 and 27 showed how

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 747

14/09/22 10:16 AM

748

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

fiscal policy affects saving, investment, and long-run economic growth. Chapters
30 and 31 examined how monetary policy influences the price level in the long run.
Now we will see how these policy tools can shift the aggregate-demand curve and
affect macroeconomic variables in the short run.
Many factors aside from monetary and fiscal policy influence aggregate demand.
Among them is the desired spending by households and firms. When desired spending changes, aggregate demand shifts, and if policymakers don’t respond, such shifts
cause short-run fluctuations in output and employment. Policymakers sometimes
use the policy levers at their disposal to try to offset these effects and stabilize the
economy. The theory behind these policy actions, together with the difficulties that
arise when using this theory in practice, is the focus of this chapter.

35-1 How Monetary Policy Influences Aggregate Demand
The aggregate-demand curve shows the total quantity of goods and services
demanded in the economy for any price level. The preceding chapter discussed
three reasons for the curve’s downward slope:
• The wealth effect: A lower price level raises the real value of households’
money holdings, which are part of their wealth. Higher real wealth
stimulates consumer spending and thus increases the quantity of goods and
services demanded.
• The interest-rate effect: A lower price level reduces the amount of money
people want to hold. As people try to lend out their excess money, the interest rate falls. The lower interest rate stimulates investment spending and thus
increases the quantity of goods and services demanded.
• The exchange-rate effect: When a lower price level reduces the interest rate,
investors move some of their funds overseas in search of higher returns.
This movement causes the real value of the domestic currency to fall in the
market for foreign-currency exchange. Domestic goods become less expensive relative to foreign goods. This change in the real exchange rate stimulates spending on net exports and thus increases the quantity of goods and
services demanded.

theory of liquidity
preference
Keynes’s theory that
the interest rate adjusts
to bring money supply
and money demand into
balance

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 748

These three effects work simultaneously to increase the quantity of goods and
services demanded when the price level falls. And the opposite occurs when the
price level rises.
While all three of these effects help explain the downward slope of the aggregatedemand curve, they are not of equal importance. Because money holdings are a
small part of household wealth, the wealth effect is the least important. In addition, because exports and imports represent only a small fraction of U.S. GDP, the
exchange-rate effect is not large for the U.S. economy. (It is more important for
smaller countries, which typically export and import a larger fraction of their GDP.)
For the U.S. economy, the most important reason for the downward slope of the
aggregate-demand curve is the interest-rate effect.
For that reason, we now examine the short-run determination of interest rates in
more detail, developing what is known as the theory of liquidity preference. This
theory of interest rates helps explain the downward slope of the aggregate-demand
curve as well as how monetary and fiscal policy can shift the curve. It is useful in
analyzing the causes of short-run fluctuations and the possible policy responses.

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

749

35-1a The Theory of Liquidity Preference
In his book The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, John Maynard
Keynes proposed the theory of liquidity preference to explain the factors that determine an economy’s interest rate. The theory is, in essence, an application of supply
and demand. According to Keynes, the interest rate adjusts to balance the supply
of and demand for money.
You may recall that economists distinguish between two interest rates: The nominal interest rate is the interest rate as usually reported, while the real interest rate
is the interest rate corrected for the effects of inflation. When there is no inflation,
the two rates are the same. But when borrowers and lenders expect prices to rise
over the term of the loan, they agree to a nominal interest rate that exceeds the
real interest rate by the expected rate of inflation. The higher nominal interest rate
compensates for the expectation that the loan will be repaid in less valuable dollars.
Which interest rate are we trying to explain with the theory of liquidity preference? The answer is both. In the analysis that follows, we hold constant the expected
rate of inflation. This assumption is reasonable for studying the economy in the
short run because expected inflation is typically stable over short periods. In this
case, nominal and real interest rates differ by a constant: When the nominal interest
rate rises or falls, the real interest rate that people expect to earn rises or falls by the
same amount. For the rest of this chapter, changes in the interest rate refer to both
the real interest rate and the nominal interest rate.
Now, let’s develop the theory of liquidity preference by considering the supply
and demand for money.

Money Supply The first piece of the theory of liquidity preference is the supply
of money. As Chapter 30 discussed, the Federal Reserve controls the money supply
in the United States. Historically, the Fed has altered the money supply primarily
by changing the quantity of reserves in the banking system through the purchase
and sale of government bonds in open-market operations. When the Fed buys
government bonds, the dollars it pays for them are typically deposited in banks
and added to bank reserves. When the Fed sells government bonds, the dollars it
receives for them are withdrawn from the banking system, and bank reserves fall.
These changes in bank reserves, in turn, lead to changes in banks’ ability to make
loans and create money. In this way, the Fed can alter the money supply.
In addition to open-market operations, the Fed can influence the money supply
using various other tools. One option used more recently is for the Fed to change
the interest rate it pays on reserves. For example, a decrease in the interest rate paid
on reserves discourages banks from holding them, increasing bank lending and, in
turn, the money supply. Conversely, an increase in the interest rate paid on reserves
encourages banks to hold them, reducing bank lending and the money supply. The
Fed can also alter the money supply by changing reserve requirements (the amount
of reserves banks must hold against deposits) or the discount rate (the interest rate
the Fed charges banks for borrowing reserves from it).
These details about monetary control are important for the implementation of
Fed policy, but they are not crucial for the analysis in this chapter. The goal here
is to examine how changes in the money supply affect the aggregate demand for
goods and services. Toward that end, the theory of liquidity preference makes the
simplifying assumption that the Fed controls the money supply directly.
Because the quantity of money supplied in the economy is fixed at whatever
level the Fed decides to set it, it does not depend on the prevailing interest rate.
We represent a fixed money supply with a vertical supply curve, as in Figure 1.

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 749

14/09/22 10:16 AM

750

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Figure 1
Equilibrium in the Money
Market

According to the theory of liquidity preference, the interest rate adjusts to bring the quantity of
money supplied and the quantity of money demanded into balance. If the interest rate is above
the equilibrium level (such as at r1), the quantity of money people want to hold (M 1d ) is less
than the quantity the Fed has created, and this surplus puts downward pressure on the interest
rate. Conversely, if the interest rate is below the equilibrium level (such as at r2), the quantity
of money people want to hold (M 2d ) exceeds the quantity the Fed has created, and this shortage
puts upward pressure on the interest rate. In this manner, the theory says, the forces of supply
and demand in the market for money push the interest rate toward the equilibrium interest rate
at which people are content holding the quantity of money the Fed has created.

Interest
Rate
Money
supply

r1
Equilibrium
interest
rate
r2

0

Money
demand
M d1

Quantity fixed
by the Fed

M d2

Quantity of
Money

Money Demand The second piece of the theory of liquidity preference is the
demand for money. Recall that an asset’s liquidity refers to the ease with which it
can be converted into the economy’s medium of exchange. Because money is the
economy’s medium of exchange, it is the most liquid asset available. This liquidity explains why there is always some demand for money: People choose to hold
money instead of other assets that offer higher rates of return because they can
use it to buy goods and services.
Although many factors determine the quantity of money demanded, the theory of
liquidity preference emphasizes the interest rate because it represents the opportunity cost of holding money. That is, when you hold wealth as cash rather than as an
interest-bearing bond or bank deposit, you lose the interest you could have earned.
An increase in the interest rate raises the cost of holding money and, as a result,
reduces the quantity of money demanded. Conversely, a decrease in the interest
rate reduces the cost of holding money and raises the quantity demanded. That’s
why, as Figure 1 shows, the money demand curve slopes downward.
Equilibrium in the Money Market According to the theory of liquidity
preference, the interest rate adjusts to balance the supply and demand for money.
There is one interest rate, called the equilibrium interest rate, at which the quantity

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 750

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

751

of money demanded exactly balances the quantity supplied. If the interest rate is at
any other level, people will try to adjust their portfolios of money and nonmonetary
assets and drive the interest rate toward the equilibrium.
For example, suppose that the interest rate is above the equilibrium level, such
as r1 in Figure 1. In this case, the quantity of money that people want to hold, Md1,
is less than the quantity that the Fed has supplied. Those people who are holding
the surplus of money will try to get rid of it by buying interest-bearing bonds or
by depositing it in interest-bearing bank accounts. Because bond issuers and banks
prefer to pay lower interest rates, they respond to this surplus of money by lowering
the rates they offer. As the interest rate falls, people become more willing to hold
money until, at the equilibrium interest rate, people are happy to hold exactly the
amount the Fed has supplied.
Conversely, at interest rates below the equilibrium level, such as r2 in Figure 1,
the quantity of money that people want to hold, Md2, exceeds the quantity that the
Fed has supplied. As a result, people try to increase their holdings of money by
reducing their holdings of bonds and other interest-bearing assets. As people cut
back on their holdings of bonds, bond issuers find that they have to offer higher
interest rates to attract buyers. Ultimately, the interest rate rises until it reaches the
equilibrium level.

Interest Rates in the Long Run and the Short Run

A

n earlier chapter said that the interest rate adjusts to balance the
supply of loanable funds (national saving) and the demand for loanable funds (desired investment). But we just said that the interest rate
adjusts to balance the supply of and demand for money. How can these
two theories be reconciled?
To answer this question, we need to focus on three macroeconomic
variables: the economy’s output of goods and services, the interest rate, and
the price level. According to the classical macroeconomic theory developed
earlier in the book, these variables are determined as follows:
1. Output is determined by the supplies of capital and labor and the
available production technology for turning capital and labor into
output. (We call this the natural level of output.)
2. For any given level of output, the interest rate adjusts to balance
the supply and demand for loanable funds.
3. Given output and the interest rate, the price level adjusts to
balance the supply and demand for money. Changes in the money
supply lead to proportionate changes in the price level.
These are three of the essential propositions of classical economic theory.
Most economists believe that these propositions do a good job of describing
how the economy works in the long run.
Yet these propositions do not hold in the short run. As we learned in
the preceding chapter, many prices are slow to adjust to changes in the
money supply. This is reflected in a short-run aggregate-supply curve that is
upward-sloping rather than vertical. As a result, in the short run, the overall

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 751

price level cannot, by itself, move to balance the supply of and demand for
money. This stickiness of the price level requires the interest rate to move
to bring the money market into equilibrium. These changes in the interest rate, in turn, affect the aggregate demand for goods and services. As
aggregate demand fluctuates, the economy’s output of goods and services
moves away from the level determined by factor supplies and technology.
When thinking about the economy in the short run (day to day, week
to week, month to month, or quarter to quarter), apply the following logic:
1. The price level is stuck at some level (based on previously formed
expectations) and, in the short run, is relatively unresponsive to
changing economic conditions.
2. For any given (stuck) price level, the interest rate adjusts to
balance the supply of and demand for money.
3. The interest rate that balances the money market influences the quantity of goods and services demanded and thereby the level of output.
Notice that this logic reverses the order of analysis used to study the
economy in the long run.
The two different theories of the interest rate are useful for different
purposes. When thinking about the long-run determinants of the interest
rate, it is best to keep in mind the loanable-funds theory, which highlights the importance of an economy’s saving propensities and investment
opportunities. But when thinking about the short-run determinants of the
interest rate, it is best to keep in mind the liquidity-preference theory,
which highlights the importance of monetary policy. ■

14/09/22 10:16 AM

752

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

35-1b The Downward Slope of the Aggregate-Demand Curve
Having seen how the theory of liquidity preference explains the economy’s equilibrium interest rate, we now consider the theory’s implications for the aggregate
demand for goods and services. As a warm-up exercise, let’s first use the theory to
reexamine a topic we have already covered—the interest-rate effect and the downward slope of the aggregate-demand curve. In particular, suppose that the overall
level of prices in the economy rises. What happens to the interest rate that balances
the supply and demand for money, and how does that change affect the quantity
of goods and services demanded?
As Chapter 31 discussed, the price level is one determinant of the quantity of
money demanded. At higher prices, more money is exchanged every time a good or
service is sold, so people will choose to hold a larger quantity of money. That means
a higher price level increases the quantity of money demanded for any interest rate.
This is shown in panel (a) of Figure 2: An increase in the price level from P1 to P2
shifts the money demand curve to the right from MD1 to MD2.
This shift in money demand affects the equilibrium in the money market. As
the figure shows, the interest rate must rise to balance money supply and money
demand. Because the higher price level has increased the amount of money people
want to hold, it has shifted the money demand curve to the right. Yet the quantity
of money supplied is fixed, so the interest rate must rise from r1 to r2 to forestall the
additional demand.
This increase in the interest rate has ramifications not only for the money market
but also for the quantity of goods and services demanded, as shown in panel (b).

Figure 2
The Money Market and the
Slope of the AggregateDemand Curve

An increase in the price level from P1 to P2 shifts the money demand curve to the right, as
in panel (a). This increase in money demand causes the interest rate to rise from r1 to r2.
Because the interest rate is the cost of borrowing, the increase in the interest rate reduces the
quantity of goods and services demanded from Y1 to Y2. This negative relationship between the
price level and quantity demanded is represented by a downward-sloping aggregate-demand
curve, as in panel (b).
(b) The Aggregate-Demand Curve

(a) The Money Market
Interest
Rate

Price
Level

Money
supply
2. . . . increases the
demand for money . . .

P2

r2
r1
3. . . .
which
increases
the
equilibrium 0
interest
rate . . .

MD2, money demand
at price level P2

MD1, money demand
at price level P1
Quantity fixed
by the Fed

Quantity
of Money

P1
1. An
increase
in the
price
level . . . 0

Aggregate
demand
Y2

Y1

Quantity
of Output

4. . . . which in turn reduces the quantity
of goods and services demanded.

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 752

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

753

At a higher interest rate, the cost of borrowing and the return to saving are greater.
Fewer households choose to borrow to buy a new house, and those who do buy
smaller houses, so the demand for residential investment falls. Fewer firms choose
to borrow to build new factories and buy new equipment, so business investment
falls. Thus, when the price level rises from P1 to P2, increasing money demand from
MD1 to MD2 and raising the interest rate from r1 to r2, the quantity of goods and
services demanded falls from Y1 to Y2.
The interest-rate effect can be summarized in three steps: (1) A higher price level
raises money demand. (2) Higher money demand leads to a higher interest rate.
(3) A higher interest rate reduces the quantity of goods and services demanded.
The same logic works for a decline in the price level: A lower price level reduces
money demand, leading to a lower interest rate and a larger quantity of goods and
services demanded. The result of this analysis is a negative relationship between
the price level and the quantity of goods and services demanded, as illustrated by
a downward-sloping aggregate-demand curve.

35-1c Changes in the Money Supply
So far, we have used the theory of liquidity preference to explain more fully how
the total quantity of goods and services demanded in the economy changes as the
price level changes. That is, we have examined movements along a downwardsloping aggregate-demand curve. The theory also sheds light, however, on some of
the other events that alter the quantity of goods and services demanded. Whenever
the quantity of goods and services demanded changes for any price level, the
aggregate-demand curve shifts.
One important variable that shifts the aggregate-demand curve is monetary policy.
To see how, suppose that the Fed increases the money supply by buying government bonds in open-market operations. (Why the Fed might do this will become
clear later.) Let’s consider how this monetary injection influences the equilibrium
interest rate for a given price level. This will reveal what the injection does to the
position of the aggregate-demand curve.
As panel (a) of Figure 3 shows, an increase in the money supply shifts the money
supply curve to the right from MS1 to MS2. Because the money demand curve has
not changed, the interest rate falls from r1 to r2 to balance money supply and money
demand. That is, the interest rate must fall to induce people to hold the additional
money the Fed has created, restoring equilibrium in the money market.
Once again, the interest rate influences the quantity of goods and services
demanded, as shown in panel (b) of Figure 3. The lower interest rate reduces the
cost of borrowing and the return to saving. Households spend more on new homes,
stimulating the demand for residential investment. Firms spend more on new factories and new equipment, stimulating business investment.
_ As a result, the quantity
of goods and services demanded
at
a
given
price
level,
P
, rises from Y1 to Y2. There
_
is nothing special about P: The monetary injection raises the quantity of goods and
services demanded at every price level. Thus, the entire aggregate-demand curve
shifts to the right.
To sum up: When the Fed increases the money supply, it lowers the interest
rate and increases the quantity of goods and services demanded for any price
level, shifting the aggregate-demand curve to the right. Conversely, when the Fed
contracts the money supply, it raises the interest rate and reduces the quantity of
goods and services demanded for any price level, shifting the aggregate-demand
curve to the left.

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 753

14/09/22 10:16 AM

754

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Figure 3
A Monetary Injection

In panel (a), an increase in the money supply from MS1 to MS2 reduces the equilibrium
interest rate from r1 to r2. When the interest rate falls, the cost of borrowing drops, raising the
quantity of goods and services demanded at a given price level from Y1 to Y2. In panel (b),
therefore, the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right from AD1 to AD2.
(a) The Money Market

Interest
Rate

r1

2. . . . the
equilibrium
interest rate
falls . . .

Money
supply,
MS1

(b) The Aggregate-Demand Curve
Price
Level

MS2

1. When the Fed
increases the
money supply . . .

P

r2

AD2
Money demand
at price level P

0

Quantity
of Money

Aggregate
demand, AD1
0

Y1

Y2

Quantity
of Output

3. . . . which increases the quantity of goods
and services demanded at a given price level.

35-1d The Role of Interest-Rate Targets in Fed Policy
How does the Federal Reserve affect the economy? So far, this book has treated
the money supply as the Fed’s policy instrument. For example, when the Fed buys
government bonds in open-market operations, it increases the money supply and
expands aggregate demand. When the Fed sells government bonds in open-market
operations, it decreases the money supply and contracts aggregate demand.
Focusing on the money supply is a good starting point, but another perspective
is useful when thinking about recent policy. In the past, the Fed has, at times, set a
target for the money supply, but that is no longer the case. The Fed now conducts
policy in large part by setting a target for the federal funds rate—the interest rate
that banks charge one another for short-term loans. This target is reevaluated every
six weeks at meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee.
There are several related reasons for the Fed’s decision to target the federal funds
rate. One is that the money supply is hard to measure precisely. Another is that
money demand fluctuates. For any given money supply, these fluctuations can
lead to changes in interest rates, aggregate demand, and output. But when the Fed
targets the federal funds rate, it essentially accommodates the day-to-day shifts in
money demand by adjusting the money supply accordingly.
The Fed’s decision to target an interest rate does not fundamentally alter our
analysis of monetary policy. The theory of liquidity preference establishes an important principle: Monetary policy can be described either in terms of the money
supply or in terms of the interest rate. When the Fed sets a target for the federal
funds rate of, say, 4 percent, it commits itself to adjusting the money supply to make
the equilibrium in the money market hit that target.

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 754

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

755

As a result, changes in monetary policy can be viewed either as changing the
interest rate target or as changing the money supply. When you read in the news
that “the Fed has reduced the target for the federal funds rate from 4 to 3 percent,”
understand that money supply is being adjusted to hit the target. When the Fed
reduces the federal funds target, it increases the money supply and reduces the
equilibrium interest rate (just as in Figure 3). Conversely, when the Fed raises the
target, it decreases the money supply and raises the equilibrium interest rate.
This link between the Fed’s interest-rate target and the money supply has become
nearly automatic since 2008, when the Fed introduced interest on reserves as a
policy tool. The rate at which banks will lend in the federal funds market is closely
tied to what they can earn by holding reserves at the Fed. When the Fed reduces
its federal funds target, it also reduces the interest rate it pays on reserves, which
increases the money supply because banks lend more to the public. And when the
Fed raises the federal funds target, it also raises the interest rate on reserves, which
reduces the money supply because banks cut back on lending.
The bottom line is simple: Changes in monetary policy aimed at expanding
aggregate demand can be described either as increasing the money supply or
as reducing the interest rate. Changes in monetary policy aimed at contracting
aggregate demand can be described either as decreasing the money supply or as
raising the interest rate.

Case
Study

Why the Fed Watches the Stock Market
(and Vice Versa)

“The stock market has predicted nine out of the past five recessions.”
So said Paul Samuelson, the distinguished economist (and textbook
author). Samuelson was entirely right about the stock market’s unimpressive
fortune-telling powers. The stock market is highly volatile and often gives the
wrong signals about the future of economic activity.
But stock prices sometimes reflect broader economic developments. The economic boom of the 1990s, for example, appeared not only in rapid GDP growth
and falling unemployment but also in rising stock prices, which increased about
fourfold during this decade. Similarly, the Great Recession of 2008 and 2009 was
reflected in falling stock prices: From November 2007 to March 2009, the stock market lost about half its value. And the severe economic downturn during the 2020
pandemic was mirrored by a 34-percent decline in stock prices from February 14 to
March 23 of that year.
How should the Fed respond to stock-market fluctuations? It has no reason to
care about stock prices in themselves, but it does have the job of monitoring and
responding to developments in the overall economy, and the stock market is a
piece of that puzzle. When the stock market booms, households become wealthier,
and this increased wealth stimulates consumer spending. In addition, a rise in
stock prices makes it more attractive for firms to sell new shares, increasing investment spending. For both reasons, a booming stock market expands the aggregate
demand for goods and services.
As we discuss more fully later in this chapter, one of the Fed’s goals is to stabilize
aggregate demand, which, in turn, means greater stability in output and the price
level. To promote stability, the Fed might respond to a stock-market boom by keeping the money supply lower and interest rates higher than it otherwise would. The
contractionary effects of tighter monetary policy would offset the expansionary
effects of higher stock prices. In fact, the Fed kept real interest rates high by historical standards during the stock-market boom of the late 1990s.

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 755

14/09/22 10:16 AM

756

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

The opposite occurs when the stock market falls. At such moments, spending on
consumption and investment tends to decline, depressing aggregate demand and
pushing the economy toward recession. To stabilize aggregate demand, the Fed
might increase the money supply and lower interest rates. On October 19, 1987, for
example, the stock market fell by 22.6 percent—one of the biggest one-day drops
in history. The Fed responded to the market crash by reducing the federal funds
rate from 7.7 percent at the beginning of October to 6.6 percent at the end of the
month. In part because of the Fed’s quick action, the economy avoided a recession.
Similarly, as the preceding chapter discussed, the Fed also reduced interest rates
during the economic downturn and stock-market decline of 2008 and 2009, but this
time, monetary policy was not sufficient to avert a deep recession. And it cut interest rates substantially during the pandemic-induced stock decline of 2020.
While the Fed watches the stock market, participants in the stock market also
watch the Fed. Changes in monetary policy can influence stock valuations. For
example, when the Fed raises interest rates, stock prices typically fall. Because
interest-bearing bonds are an alternative to stocks, a higher interest rate reduces the
present value of any future cash flows associated with stock ownership. In addition,
tighter monetary policy depresses the demand for goods and services, reducing
economic activity and firms’ profits. ●

35-1e The Zero Lower Bound
So monetary policy works through interest rates. This raises a question: What if the
Fed’s target interest rate has fallen as far as it can? In the Great Recession of 2008
and 2009 and again during the coronavirus recession of 2020, the federal funds rate
fell to about zero. In this situation, what, if anything, can monetary policy do to
stimulate the economy?
Some economists describe this situation as a liquidity trap. According to the
theory of liquidity preference, expansionary monetary policy works by reducing interest
rates and stimulating investment spending. But if interest rates have already fallen
to around zero, monetary policy may no longer be effective. Nominal interest rates
cannot fall much below zero: Rather than making a loan at a negative nominal interest rate, a person would just hold cash. In this environment, expansionary monetary
policy raises the supply of money, making the public’s asset portfolio more liquid, but
because interest rates can’t fall further, the extra liquidity might not have any effect.
Aggregate demand, production, and employment may be “trapped” at low levels.
Other economists are skeptical about the relevance of liquidity traps and believe
that a central bank continues to have tools to expand the economy, even after its
interest rate target hits its lower bound of zero. One option is to have the central bank
commit itself to keeping interest rates low for an extended period. Such a policy is
sometimes called forward guidance. Even if the central bank’s current target for
the interest rate cannot fall any further, the promise that interest rates will remain
low may help stimulate investment spending.
A second option is to have the central bank conduct expansionary open-market
operations using a larger variety of financial instruments. Normally, the Fed conducts
expansionary open-market operations by buying short-term government bonds. But
it could also buy mortgage-backed securities and longer-term government bonds to
lower the interest rates on these kinds of loans. This type of unconventional monetary
policy is sometimes called quantitative easing because it increases the quantity of
bank reserves. During both the Great Recession and the coronavirus recession, the
Fed engaged in forward guidance and quantitative easing.

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 756

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

757

Some economists have suggested that the possibility of hitting the zero lower
bound for interest rates justifies setting the target rate of inflation well above zero.
Under zero inflation, the real interest rate, like the nominal interest rate, can never
fall below zero. But if the normal rate of inflation is, say, 4 percent, then the central
bank can easily push the real interest rate to negative 4 percent by lowering the
nominal interest rate to zero. A higher inflation target gives monetary policymakers
more room to stimulate the economy when needed, reducing the risk of hitting the
zero lower bound and falling into a liquidity trap.

QuickQuiz
1. According to the theory of liquidity preference, an
economy’s interest rate adjusts
a. to balance the supply and demand for loanable
funds.
b. to balance the supply and demand for money.
c. one-for-one to changes in expected inflation.
d. to equal the interest rate prevailing in world
financial markets.
2. If the central bank wants to contract aggregate
demand, it can ________ the money supply and
thereby ________ the interest rate.
a. increase; increase
b. increase; decrease
c. decrease; increase
d. decrease; decrease

3. The Fed’s target for the federal funds rate
a. is an extra policy tool for the central bank in
addition to and independent of the money supply.
b. commits the Fed to set a particular money supply
so that it hits the announced target.
c. is a goal that is rarely achieved because the Fed
can determine only the money supply.
d. matters to banks that borrow and lend federal
funds but does not influence aggregate demand.

Answers are at the end of the chapter.

35-2 How Fiscal Policy Influences Aggregate
Demand
The government can influence the behavior of the economy not only with monetary
policy but also with fiscal policy. Fiscal policy refers to the government’s choices
regarding the overall levels of government purchases and taxes. Earlier in the book,
we examined how fiscal policy influences saving, investment, and growth in the
long run. In the short run, however, the primary effect of fiscal policy is on the
aggregate demand for goods and services.

fiscal policy
the setting of the
levels of government
spending and taxation by
government policymakers

35-2a Changes in Government Purchases
When policymakers change the money supply or the level of taxes, they shift the
aggregate-demand curve indirectly by influencing the spending decisions of firms
or households. By contrast, when the government alters its own purchases of goods
and services, it shifts the aggregate-demand curve directly.
Suppose, for instance, that the U.S. Department of Defense places a $20 billion
order for new fighter planes with Boeing, the aircraft manufacturer. This order
raises the demand for the output produced by Boeing, inducing the company to
hire more workers and increase production. For the overall economy, the increase
in the demand for Boeing planes means an increase in the total quantity of goods

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 757

14/09/22 10:16 AM

758

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

and services demanded at each price level. As a result, the aggregate-demand curve
shifts to the right.
By how much does this $20 billion order from the government shift the aggregatedemand curve? You might guess that the aggregate-demand curve shifts to the right
by exactly $20 billion. It turns out, however, that this is not the case. Two macroeconomic effects cause the size of the shift in aggregate demand to differ from the
change in government purchases. The first—the multiplier effect—suggests the shift
in aggregate demand could be larger than $20 billion. The second—the crowding-out
effect—suggests the shift in aggregate demand could be smaller than $20 billion.
We discuss these two effects in turn.

35-2b The Multiplier Effect

multiplier effect
the additional shifts in
aggregate demand that
result when expansionary
fiscal policy increases
income and thereby
increases consumer
spending

When the government buys $20 billion of goods from Boeing, that purchase has
repercussions. The immediate impact is to raise employment and profits at Boeing.
Then, as the workers see higher earnings and the firm’s owners see higher profits,
they respond to this increase in income by raising their own spending on consumer
goods. As a result, the government purchase from Boeing raises the demand for
the products of many other firms in the economy. Because each dollar spent by the
government can raise the aggregate demand for goods and services by more than
a dollar, government purchases are said to have a multiplier effect on aggregate
demand.
This multiplier effect continues even after this first round. When consumer spending rises, the firms that produce these consumer goods hire more people and experience higher profits. Higher earnings and profits stimulate consumer spending once
again and so on. A positive feedback loop develops, as higher demand leads to higher
income, which in turn leads to even higher demand. Once all these effects are added
together, the total impact on the quantity of goods and services demanded can be
much larger than the initial boost from higher government spending.
Figure 4 illustrates the multiplier effect. The increase in government purchases of
$20 billion initially shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the right from AD1 to AD2
by exactly $20 billion. But once consumers respond by increasing their spending,
the aggregate-demand curve shifts still farther to AD3.
The multiplier effect arising from the response of consumer spending can be
strengthened by the response of investment to higher levels of demand. For instance,
Boeing might react to the higher demand for planes by deciding to buy more equipment or build another plant. In this case, higher government demand spurs higher
demand for investment goods. The positive influence of demand on investment is
sometimes called the investment accelerator.

35-2c A Formula for the Spending Multiplier
Simple algebra allows us to derive a formula for the size of the multiplier effect that
arises when an increase in government purchases induces increases in consumer
spending. An important concept, and one that appears in this formula, is the marginal propensity to consume (MPC)—the fraction of extra income that a household
consumes rather than saves. For example, suppose that the marginal propensity to
consume is 3/4. This means that for every extra dollar a household earns, the household spends $0.75 (3/4 of the dollar) and saves $0.25. With an MPC of 3/4, when the
workers and owners of Boeing earn $20 billion from the government contract, they
increase their consumer spending by 3/4 3 $20 billion, or $15 billion.
To gauge the impact of a change in government purchases on aggregate demand,
we follow the effects step-by-step. The process begins when the government

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 758

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

Figure 4

759

Price
Level

The Multiplier Effect
An increase in government
purchases of $20 billion can shift
the aggregate-demand curve to the
right by more than $20 billion. This
multiplier effect arises because
increases in aggregate income
stimulate additional spending by
consumers.

2. . . . but the multiplier
effect can amplify the
shift in aggregate
demand.
$20 billion

AD3
AD 2
Aggregate demand, AD 1
0

1. An increase in government purchases
of $20 billion initially increases aggregate
demand by $20 billion . . .

Quantity of
Output

spends $20 billion and, as a result, increases national income (earnings and profits) by the same amount. With an extra $20 billion of income, consumers increase
spending by MPC 3 $20 billion. This additional consumer spending raises the
income for the workers and owners of the firms that produce the consumption
goods by the same amount. With this second increase in income, consumers
increase spending again, this time by MPC 3 (MPC 3 $20 billion). These feedback
effects go on and on.
To determine the total impact on the demand for goods and services, we add
up all these effects:
Change in government purchases 5

$20 billion

First change in consumption

5 MPC 3 $20 billion

Second change in consumption

5 MPC2 3 $20 billion

Third change in consumption

5 MPC3 3 $20 billion

•

•

•

•

•

•

Total change in demand
5 (1 1 MPC 1 MPC2 1 MPC3 1 · · ·) 3 $20 billion.

Here “. . .” represents an infinite number of similar terms. We can write the multiplier
as follows:
Multiplier 5 1 1 MPC 1 MPC2 1 MPC3 1 · · · ·

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 759

14/09/22 10:16 AM

760

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

This multiplier tells us the demand for goods and services that each dollar of government purchases generates.
To simplify this equation for the multiplier, recall from math class that this expression is an infinite geometric series. For x between −1 and 11,
1 1 x 1 x2 1 x3 1 · · · 5 1/(1 − x).

In our case, x 5 MPC. Thus,
Multiplier 5 1/(1 − MPC).

For example, if MPC is 3/4, the multiplier is 1/(1 − 3/4), which is 4. In this case, the
$20 billion of government spending generates $80 billion of demand for goods and
services.
This formula shows that the size of the multiplier depends on the marginal
propensity to consume. While an MPC of 3/4 leads to a multiplier of 4, an MPC of
1
/2 leads to a multiplier of only 2. Thus, a higher MPC means a larger multiplier.
To see why, remember that the multiplier arises because higher income induces
greater consumer spending. The higher the MPC, the more consumption responds
to a change in income, and the larger the multiplier.

35-2d Other Applications of the Multiplier Effect
Because of the multiplier effect, a dollar of government purchases can generate more
than a dollar of aggregate demand. The logic of the multiplier effect, however, is not
restricted to changes in government purchases. Instead, it applies to any event that
alters spending on any component of GDP—consumption, investment, government
purchases, or net exports.
For example, suppose that a recession overseas reduces the demand for U.S. net
exports by $10 billion. This reduced spending on U.S. goods and services depresses
U.S. national income and, in turn, reduces spending by U.S. consumers. If the marginal propensity to consume is 3/4 and the multiplier is 4, then the $10 billion fall in
net exports leads to a $40 billion contraction in aggregate demand.
As another example, suppose that a stock-market boom increases household
wealth and stimulates spending on goods and services by $20 billion. This extra
consumer spending increases national income and, in turn, generates even more
consumer spending. If the marginal propensity to consume is 3/4 and the multiplier
is 4, then the initial increase of $20 billion in consumer spending translates into an
$80 billion increase in aggregate demand.
The multiplier is an important concept in macroeconomics because it shows how
the economy can amplify the impact of changes in spending. A small initial change
in consumption, investment, government purchases, or net exports can end up having a large effect on aggregate demand and, therefore, the economy’s production
of goods and services.

35-2e The Crowding-Out Effect
The multiplier effect seems to suggest that when the government buys $20 billion
of planes from Boeing, the resulting expansion in aggregate demand is necessarily
larger than $20 billion. Yet another force works in the opposite direction. While an
increase in government purchases stimulates the aggregate demand for goods and
services, it also causes the interest rate to rise, reducing investment spending and
putting downward pressure on aggregate demand. The reduction in aggregate

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 760

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

demand that results when a fiscal expansion raises the interest rate is called the
crowding-out effect.
To see why crowding out occurs, consider what happens in the money market
when the government buys planes from Boeing. The increase in demand raises
the incomes of the workers and owners of this firm (and, because of the multiplier
effect, of other firms as well). As incomes rise, households plan to buy more goods
and services and so choose to hold more of their wealth in liquid form. That is, the
increase in income caused by the fiscal expansion raises the demand for money,
and this may have consequences.
The effect of the increase in money demand is shown in panel (a) of Figure 5.
If the Fed does not change the money supply, the vertical supply curve remains
the same. When the higher level of income shifts the money demand curve to the
right from MD1 to MD2, the interest rate must rise from r1 to r2 to keep supply and
demand in balance.
The increase in the interest rate, in turn, reduces the quantity of goods and services
demanded. In particular, because borrowing is more expensive, the demand for
residential and business investment goods declines. In other words, as the increase
in government purchases increases the demand for goods and services, it may
also crowd out investment. This crowding-out effect partially offsets the impact of
government purchases on aggregate demand, as illustrated in panel (b) of Figure 5.

The Crowding-Out Effect

Price
Level

Money
supply

3. . . . which
increases
r1
the
equilibrium
interest
rate . . .

4. . . . which in turn
partly offsets the
initial increase in
aggregate demand.

$20 billion

2. . . . the increase in
spending raises
money demand . . .

r2

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 761

the offset in aggregate
demand that results
when expansionary fiscal
policy raises the interest
rate and thereby reduces
investment spending

(b) The Shift in Aggregate Demand

(a) The Money Market

0

crowding-out effect

Panel (a) shows the money market. When the government increases its purchases of goods and
services, income increases, raising the demand for money from MD1 to MD2 and increasing the
equilibrium interest rate from r1 to r2. Panel (b) shows the effects on aggregate demand. The
initial impact of the increase in government purchases shifts the aggregate-demand curve from
AD1 to AD2. Yet because the interest rate is the cost of borrowing, the increase in the interest
rate tends to reduce the quantity of goods and services demanded, particularly for investment
goods. This crowding out of investment partially offsets the impact of the fiscal expansion on
aggregate demand. In the end, the aggregate-demand curve shifts only to AD3.

Figure 5

Interest
Rate

761

AD 2
AD 3

MD 2

Aggregate demand, AD 1

Money demand, MD1
Quantity fixed
by the Fed

Quantity
of Money

0
1. When an increase in government
purchases raises aggregate
demand . . .

Quantity
of Output

14/09/22 10:16 AM

762

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

The increase in government purchases initially shifts the aggregate-demand curve
from AD1 to AD2, but once crowding out takes place, the aggregate-demand curve
drops back to AD3.
To sum up: When the government increases its purchases by $20 billion,
the aggregate demand for goods and services could rise by more or less than
$20 billion depending on the sizes of the multiplier and crowding-out effects.
The multiplier effect makes the shift in aggregate demand greater than $20 billion. The crowding-out effect pushes the aggregate-demand curve in the opposite
direction and can, if large enough, result in an aggregate-demand shift of less
than $20 billion.

35-2f Changes in Taxes
The other important instrument of fiscal policy, besides government purchases, is
taxation. When the government cuts personal income taxes, for instance, it increases
households’ take-home pay. Households will save some of this additional income,
but they will also spend some on consumer goods. Because the tax cut increases
consumer spending, it shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the right. Similarly, a
tax increase depresses consumer spending and shifts the aggregate-demand curve
to the left.
The size of the shift in aggregate demand resulting from a tax change is also
affected by the multiplier and crowding-out effects. When the government cuts taxes
and stimulates consumer spending, earnings and profits rise, stimulating additional
spending. This is the multiplier effect. At the same time, the increase in income
raises money demand, which, other things being equal, tends to increase interest
rates. Higher interest rates mean a higher cost of borrowing and less investment
spending. This is the crowding-out effect. Depending on the sizes of the multiplier
and crowding-out effects, the shift in aggregate demand could be larger or smaller
than the tax change that causes it.
In addition to the multiplier and crowding-out effects, there is another important
determinant of the size of the shift in aggregate demand that results from a tax
change: people’s perceptions about whether the tax change is permanent or temporary. For example, suppose that the government announces a tax cut of $1,000 per
person. In deciding how much of this $1,000 to spend, people must ask themselves
how long this extra income will last. If they expect the tax cut to be permanent, they
will view it as adding substantially to their financial resources and may, therefore,
increase their spending by a large amount. In this case, the tax cut is likely to have
a large impact on aggregate demand. But if people expect the tax change to be temporary, they will view it as adding only slightly to their financial resources and may
increase their spending by only a small amount. In this case, the tax cut is likely to
have a small impact on aggregate demand.
An extreme example of a temporary tax cut was the one announced in 1992. In
that year, President George H. W. Bush faced a lingering recession and an upcoming reelection campaign. He responded to these circumstances by reducing the
amount of income tax that the federal government would withhold from workers’
paychecks. Because legislated income tax rates did not change, however, every
dollar of reduced withholding in 1992 meant an extra dollar of taxes due on April 15,
1993, when income tax returns for 1992 were to be filed. This “tax cut” was really
only a short-term loan from the government. Its impact on consumer spending and
aggregate demand was relatively small.

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 762

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

763

How Fiscal Policy Might Affect Aggregate Supply

S

o far, this discussion has stressed how changes in government purchases and in taxes influence the quantity of goods and services
demanded. Most economists believe that the short-run macroeconomic
effects of fiscal policy work primarily through aggregate demand. Yet
fiscal policy can potentially influence the quantity of goods and services
supplied as well.
For instance, consider the effects of tax changes on aggregate supply.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1 is that people respond
to incentives. When government policymakers cut tax rates, workers get
to keep more of each dollar they earn, so they have a greater incentive to
work and produce goods and services. If they respond to this incentive,
the quantity of goods and services supplied will be greater at each price
level, and the aggregate-supply curve will shift to the right.
Economists who stress the importance of tax policy for aggregate
supply rather than aggregate demand are sometimes called supply siders.
At times, some supply siders have argued that the influence of taxes on

aggregate supply is so large that a cut in tax rates will stimulate enough
additional production and income to increase tax revenue. This outcome is
a theoretical possibility, but most economists do not consider it the normal
case. While the supply-side effects of taxes are important to consider, they
are rarely large enough to cause tax revenue to rise when tax rates fall.
Like changes in taxes, changes in government purchases can also affect
aggregate supply. Suppose, for instance, that the government increases
expenditure on a form of government-provided capital, such as roads or the
nation’s railroad network. Roads and railroads are used by private businesses
to make deliveries to their customers, so an increase in the quantity or
quality of this infrastructure increases these businesses’ productivity. When
the government spends more on roads and rails, it increases the quantity
of goods and services supplied at any price level, shifting the aggregatesupply curve to the right. This effect on aggregate supply is probably more
important in the long run than in the short run, however, because it takes
time for the government to build infrastructure and put it into use. ■

QuickQuiz
4. If the government wants to expand aggregate
demand, it can ________ government purchases or
________ taxes.
a. increase; increase
b. increase; decrease
c. decrease; increase
d. decrease, decrease
5. With the economy in a recession because of inadequate aggregate demand, the government increases
its purchases by $1,200. Suppose the central bank
adjusts the money supply to hold the interest rate
constant, investment spending remains unchanged,
and the marginal propensity to consume is 2/3. How
large is the increase in aggregate demand?
a. $400
b. $800

c. $1,800
d. $3,600
6. If the central bank in the preceding question had
instead held the money supply constant and allowed
the interest rate to adjust, the change in aggregate
demand resulting from the increase in government
purchases would have been
a. larger.
b. the same.
c. smaller but still positive.
d. negative.

Answers are at the end of the chapter.

35-3 Using Policy to Stabilize the Economy
The influence of monetary and fiscal policy on the aggregate demand for goods and
services raises some important questions: Should policymakers use these instruments to control aggregate demand and stabilize the economy? If so, when? If not,
why not?

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 763

14/09/22 10:16 AM

764

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

35-3a The Case for Active Stabilization Policy
Let’s return to the question that began this chapter: When the president and Congress
raise taxes to reduce a budget deficit, how should the Federal Reserve respond?
We have seen that the level of taxation is one determinant of the position of the
aggregate-demand curve. When the government raises taxes, aggregate demand
falls, depressing production and employment in the short run. If the Fed wants to
prevent this adverse effect of the fiscal policy, it can expand aggregate demand by
increasing the money supply. A monetary expansion would reduce interest rates,
stimulate investment spending, and expand aggregate demand. If monetary policy
is set appropriately, the combined changes in monetary and fiscal policy could leave
the aggregate demand for goods and services unaffected.
This analysis is exactly the sort followed by members of the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC). They know that monetary policy is an important determinant
of aggregate demand. They also know that there are other important determinants
as well, including fiscal policy set by the president and Congress. As a result, the
FOMC watches the debates over fiscal policy with a keen eye.
This response of monetary policy to the change in fiscal policy is an example of
a more general phenomenon: the use of policy instruments to stabilize aggregate
demand and, in turn, production and employment. Economic stabilization has been
an explicit goal of U.S. policy since the Employment Act of 1946. This act states
that “it is the continuing policy and responsibility of the federal government to . . .
promote full employment and production.” In essence, this law and others hold the
government accountable for short-run macroeconomic performance.
The Employment Act has two implications. First, the government should avoid
being a cause of economic fluctuations. Unless a crisis requires it, most economists
advise against large and sudden changes in monetary and fiscal policy because
such changes are likely to cause sizable shifts in aggregate demand. Moreover,
when large changes do occur, it is important that monetary and fiscal policymakers
respond to each others’ actions.
Second, the government should, as much as possible, respond to changes in the
private economy to stabilize aggregate demand. The Employment Act was passed
not long after the publication of Keynes’s The General Theory of Employment, Interest,
and Money, one of the most influential books ever written about economics. In it,
Keynes emphasized the key role of aggregate demand in explaining short-run fluctuations. Keynes said the government should actively stimulate the economy when
aggregate demand was insufficient to maintain production at its full-employment
level.
Keynes (and his many followers) said that aggregate demand fluctuates because
of largely irrational waves of pessimism and optimism. He used the term “animal
spirits” to refer to these changes in attitude. When pessimism reigns, households
reduce consumption spending, and firms reduce investment spending. The result
is reduced aggregate demand, lower production, and higher unemployment.
Conversely, when optimism reigns, households and firms increase spending. The
result is higher aggregate demand, higher production, and inflationary pressure.
Notice that these changes in attitude are, to some extent, self-fulfilling.
In principle, the government can adjust its monetary and fiscal policy in response
to these waves of optimism and pessimism and, thereby, stabilize the economy.
For example, when people are excessively pessimistic, the Fed can expand the
money supply to lower interest rates and expand aggregate demand. When they
are excessively optimistic, it can contract the money supply to raise interest rates
and dampen aggregate demand. Former Fed Chairman William McChesney Martin

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 764

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

765

described this view of monetary policy very simply: “The Federal Reserve’s job is
to take away the punch bowl just as the party gets going.”

Case
Study

Keynesians in the White House

When a reporter in 1961 asked President John F. Kennedy why he
advocated a tax cut, Kennedy replied, “To stimulate the economy.
Don’t you remember your Economics 101?” Kennedy’s policy was,
in fact, based on the theory of fiscal policy analyzed in this chapter. His goal was
to raise consumer spending, expand aggregate demand, and increase the economy’s production and employment.
In proposing a tax cut, Kennedy was relying on a group of eminent economic
advisers. In addition to Paul Samuelson, who tutored Kennedy informally, they
included James Tobin, Robert Solow, and Kenneth Arrow, all of whom would later
win Nobel Prizes for their contributions to the field. As students in the 1940s, these
economists had closely studied Keynes’s General Theory, which was then only a few
years old. Kennedy’s proposal put Keynes’s ideas into action.
While tax changes have a potent influence on aggregate demand, they can
also alter the aggregate supply of goods and services, as discussed earlier in an
FYI box. Part of the Kennedy proposal was an investment tax
credit that gave a tax break to firms that invested in new capital.
Higher investment would not only stimulate aggregate demand
Ask the
immediately but also increase the economy’s productive capacExperts
ity over the long run. When the tax cut Kennedy proposed was
finally enacted in 1964, it helped usher in a period of robust
growth.
“Because of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
Since the 1964 tax cut, policymakers have, from time to time,
2009, the U.S. unemployment rate was lower at the end of 2010
used fiscal policy as a tool for influencing aggregate demand.
than it would have been without the stimulus bill.”
For example, when President Barack Obama moved into the
What do economists say?
Oval Office in 2009, he faced an economy in the midst of a
recession. One of his first policy initiatives was a stimulus bill
3% disagree
0% uncertain
called the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA),
which included substantial increases in government spending. A central aim of this legislation was to increase aggregate
97% agree
demand and speed up the recovery. And again, in 2020 and
2021, the federal government under both President Trump and
President Biden engaged in fiscal stimulus in part to restore
“Taking into account all of the ARRA’s economic consequencaggregate demand and mitigate the lingering effects of the
es—including the economic costs of raising taxes to pay for
coronavirus recession. ●

Economic
Stimulus

35-3b The Case against Active Stabilization Policy
Some economists argue that the government should avoid active
use of monetary and fiscal policy to try to stabilize the economy.
They say that these policy instruments should be set to achieve
long-run goals, such as robust economic growth and low inflation,
and that the economy should deal with most short-run fluctuations on its own. These economists may admit that monetary and
fiscal policy can stabilize the economy in theory, but they doubt
whether it can do so in practice.
The main argument against active monetary and fiscal policy
is that these policies operate with a long lag. As we have seen,

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 765

the spending, its effects on future spending, and any other
likely future effects—the benefits of the stimulus will end up
exceeding its costs.”
What do economists say?
6% disagree

19% uncertain

75% agree

Source: IGM Economic Experts Panel, July 29, 2014.

14/09/22 10:16 AM

766

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

© THE WASHINGTON POST 2001/TOLES/ANDREWS MCMEEL SYNDICATION

monetary policy works by changing interest rates, which, in turn, influence investment
spending. But many firms make investment plans far in advance. Most economists
believe that it takes at least six months for changes in monetary policy to have much
effect on output and employment. Moreover, once these effects occur, they can last
for several years. Critics of stabilization policy say that because of this lag, the Fed
should not try to fine-tune the economy. They claim that the Fed often reacts to
changing circumstances too late and, as a result, ends up causing rather than curing economic fluctuations. These critics advocate a passive monetary policy, such
as slow and steady growth in the money supply.
Fiscal policy also works with a lag, one that is largely caused by the political
process. In the United States, most big changes in government spending and taxes
must go through congressional committees in both the House and the Senate, be
passed by both legislative bodies, and then be signed by the president. Completing
this process can take months or, in some cases, years. By the time the change in
fiscal policy is ready to be implemented, the condition of the economy may have
changed.
These lags in monetary and fiscal policy are problematic because economic forecasting is so imprecise. If it were possible to accurately predict the condition of the
economy a year in advance, monetary and fiscal policymakers could look ahead
when making policy decisions. With enough lead time, policymakers could choose
the appropriate short-run policy despite the lags they face. In practice, however,
recessions and depressions arrive without much advance warning. The best that
policymakers can do is to respond to economic changes as they occur.

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 766

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

767

35-3c Automatic Stabilizers
All economists—both advocates and critics of stabilization policy—agree that the
lags in implementation reduce the efficacy of policy as a tool for short-run stabilization. The economy would be more stable, therefore, if policymakers could find a way
to avoid some of these lags. In fact, they have. Automatic stabilizers are changes
in fiscal policy that stimulate aggregate demand when the economy goes into a
recession but that occur without policymakers having to take any deliberate action.
The most important automatic stabilizer is the tax system. When the economy
enters a recession, the government’s tax collections decline automatically because
almost all taxes are closely tied to economic activity. The personal income tax
depends on households’ incomes, the payroll tax depends on workers’ earnings,
and the corporate income tax depends on firms’ profits. Because incomes, earnings, and profits all fall in a recession, the government’s tax revenue falls as well.
This automatic tax cut stimulates aggregate demand and reduces the magnitude
of economic fluctuations.
Some government spending also acts as an automatic stabilizer. When the economy goes into a recession and workers are laid off, more people become eligible for
unemployment insurance benefits, welfare benefits, and other forms of income support. This automatic increase in government spending stimulates aggregate demand
when demand is insufficient to maintain full employment. When the unemployment
insurance system was first enacted in the 1930s, the economists who advocated this
policy recognized its power as an automatic stabilizer.
The automatic stabilizers in the U.S. economy are not sufficiently strong to prevent recessions completely. Nonetheless, without them, output and employment
would likely be more volatile than they are. For this reason, while some politicians
have proposed a constitutional amendment requiring the federal government to
always run a balanced budget, economists generally oppose it. When the economy
experiences a recession, taxes fall, government spending rises, and the government’s
budget moves toward deficit. If the government faced a strict balanced-budget rule, it
would be forced to look for ways to raise taxes or cut spending at the worst possible
time. In other words, a strict balanced-budget rule would undercut the automatic
stabilizers inherent in the current system of taxes and government spending.

automatic stabilizers
changes in fiscal policy
that stimulate aggregate
demand when the
economy goes into a
recession but that occur
without policymakers
having to take any
deliberate action

QuickQuiz
7. Suppose a wave of negative “animal spirits” overruns
the economy, and people become pessimistic about
the future. To stabilize aggregate demand, the Fed
could ________ its target for the federal funds rate or
Congress could ________ taxes.
a. increase; increase
b. increase; decrease
c. decrease; increase
d. decrease; decrease
8. Monetary policy affects the economy with a lag
mainly because it takes a long time
a. for central banks to make policy changes.
b. to change the money supply after a policy decision
has been made.

c. for a change in the money supply to affect interest
rates.
d. for a change in interest rates to affect investment
spending.
9. Which of the following is an example of an automatic
stabilizer? When the economy goes into a recession,
a. more people become eligible for unemployment
insurance benefits.
b. stock prices decline, particularly for firms in
cyclical industries.
c. Congress begins hearings about a possible
stimulus package.
d. the Fed changes its target for the federal funds
rate.
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 767

14/09/22 10:16 AM

768

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

35-4 Conclusion
Before policymakers make any change in policy, they need to consider all the effects
of their decisions. Earlier, this book examined classical models of the economy,
which describe the long-run effects of monetary and fiscal policy. These models
showed how fiscal policy influences saving, investment, and long-run growth and
how monetary policy affects the price level and the inflation rate.
This chapter examined the short-run effects of monetary and fiscal policy. We
saw how these policy instruments influence the aggregate demand for goods and
services. Changes in aggregate demand can, in the short run, alter the economy’s
production and employment.
Both time horizons are important. When Congress alters government spending
or taxes, it needs to consider both the long-run effects on growth and the short-run
effects on employment. When the Fed changes the money supply and interest rates,
it must recognize the long-run effect on inflation as well as the short-run effect on
production. In all parts of government, policymakers must keep in mind both longrun and short-run goals.

Chapter in a Nutshell
• In his work on short-run economic fluctuations, Keynes
proposed the theory of liquidity preference to explain
the determinants of the interest rate. According to this
theory, the interest rate adjusts to balance the supply
and demand for money.
• An increase in the price level raises money demand
and increases the interest rate that brings the money
market into equilibrium. Because the interest rate
represents the cost of borrowing, a higher interest rate
reduces investment spending and thereby reduces the
quantity of goods and services demanded. The downward-sloping aggregate-demand curve expresses this
negative relationship between the price level and the
quantity demanded.
• Policymakers can influence aggregate demand using
monetary policy. An increase in the money supply
reduces the equilibrium interest rate for any price
level. Because a lower interest rate stimulates investment spending, the aggregate-demand curve shifts to
the right. Conversely, a decrease in the money supply
raises the equilibrium interest rate for any price level
and shifts the aggregate-demand curve to the left.
• Policymakers can also influence aggregate demand
using fiscal policy. An increase in government pur-

chases or a cut in taxes shifts the aggregate-demand
curve to the right. A decrease in government purchases
or an increase in taxes shifts the aggregate-demand
curve to the left.
• When the government alters spending or taxes, the
resulting shift in aggregate demand can be larger or
smaller than the fiscal change. The multiplier effect
tends to amplify the effects of fiscal policy on aggregate
demand. The crowding-out effect tends to dampen
those effects.
• Because monetary and fiscal policy can influence
aggregate demand, the government sometimes uses
these policy instruments to stabilize the economy.
Economists disagree about how actively the government should do this. Advocates of active stabilization
policy say that changes in attitudes by households and
firms shift aggregate demand and that, if the government does not respond, the result is undesirable and
unnecessary fluctuations in output and employment.
Advocates of more passive policy say that monetary and fiscal policy work with such long lags that
attempts at stabilizing the economy often end up being
destabilizing.

Key Concepts
theory of liquidity preference, p. 748
fiscal policy, p. 757

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 768

multiplier effect, p. 758
crowding-out effect, p. 761

automatic stabilizers, p. 767

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter 35 The Influence of Monetary and Fiscal Policy on Aggregate Demand

769

Questions for Review
1. What is the theory of liquidity preference? How does
it help explain the downward slope of the aggregatedemand curve?
2. Use the theory of liquidity preference to explain how
a decrease in the money supply affects the aggregatedemand curve.
3. The government spends $3 billion to buy police cars.
Explain why aggregate demand might increase by
more or less than $3 billion.

4. Suppose that survey measures of consumer
confidence indicate a wave of pessimism is sweeping
the country. If policymakers do nothing, what will
happen to aggregate demand? What should the
Fed do if it wants to stabilize aggregate demand? If
the Fed does nothing, what might Congress do to
stabilize aggregate demand? Explain your reasoning.
5. Give an example of a government policy that acts as
an automatic stabilizer. Explain why the policy has
this effect.

Problems and Applications
1. Explain how each of the following developments
would affect the supply of money, the demand
for money, and the interest rate. Use diagrams to
illustrate your answers.
a. The Fed’s bond traders buy bonds in open-market
operations.
b. An increase in credit-card availability reduces the
amount of cash people want to hold.
c. The Fed reduces the interest rate it pays on
reserves.
d. Households decide to hold more money to use for
holiday shopping.
e. A wave of optimism boosts business investment
and expands aggregate demand.
2. The Fed expands the money supply by 5 percent.
a. Use the theory of liquidity preference to illustrate
in a graph the impact of this policy on the interest
rate.
b. Use the model of aggregate demand and
aggregate supply to illustrate the impact of this
change in the interest rate on output and the price
level in the short run.
c. When the economy makes the transition from
its short-run equilibrium to its new long-run
equilibrium, what happens to the price level?
d. How does this change in the price level affect the
demand for money and the equilibrium interest
rate?
e. Is this analysis consistent with the proposition
that money has real effects in the short run but is
neutral in the long run?
3. Suppose a computer virus disables automatic teller
machines and disrupts online payment systems. As
a result, people want to keep more cash on hand,
increasing the demand for money.
a. Assume the Fed does not change the money
supply. According to the theory of liquidity

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 769

preference, what happens to the interest rate?
What happens to aggregate demand?
b. If, instead, the Fed wants to stabilize aggregate
demand, how should it change the money supply?
c. If the Fed wants to accomplish this change in the
money supply using open-market operations,
what should it do?
4. Consider two policies—a tax cut that lasts for
only one year and a tax cut that is expected to be
permanent. Which policy will stimulate greater
spending by consumers? Which policy will have the
greater impact on aggregate demand? Explain.
5. The economy is in a recession with high
unemployment and low output.
a. Draw a graph of aggregate demand and aggregate
supply to illustrate the current situation. Be sure
to include the aggregate-demand curve, the shortrun aggregate-supply curve, and the long-run
aggregate-supply curve.
b. Identify an open-market operation that would
restore the economy to its natural rate.
c. Draw a graph of the money market to illustrate
the effect of this open-market operation. Show the
resulting change in the interest rate.
d. Draw a graph similar to the one in part (a) to show
the effect of the open-market operation on output
and the price level. Explain in words why the
policy has the effect you have shown in the graph.
6. In the 1970s and early 1980s, new legislation allowed
banks to pay interest on certain checking deposits,
which they could not do previously.
a. If we define money to include checking deposits,
what effect did this legislation have on money
demand? Explain.
b. If the Fed had maintained a constant money
supply in the face of this change, what would
have happened to the interest rate? What would

14/09/22 10:16 AM

770

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

10. Is expansionary fiscal policy more likely to lead to a
short-run increase in investment
a. when the investment accelerator is large or when
it is small? Explain.
b. when the interest sensitivity of investment is large
or when it is small? Explain.

have happened to aggregate demand and
aggregate output?
c. If the Fed had maintained a constant market
interest rate (the interest rate on nonmonetary
assets) in the face of this change, what change in
the money supply would have been necessary?
What would have happened to aggregate demand
and aggregate output?

11. Consider an economy described by the following
equations:

7. Suppose economists observe that an increase in
government spending of $10 billion raises the total
demand for goods and services by $30 billion.
a. If these economists ignore the possibility of
crowding out, what would they estimate the
marginal propensity to consume (MPC) to be?
b. Now suppose the economists allow for crowding
out. Would their new estimate of the MPC be
larger or smaller than their initial one?

Y5C1I1G
C 5 100 1 0.75(Y − T)
I 5 500 2 50r
G 5 125
T 5 100
where Y is GDP, C is consumption, I is investment,
G is government purchases, T is taxes, and r is the
interest rate. If the economy were at full employment
(that is, at its natural level of output), GDP would
be 2,000.
a. Explain the meaning of each of these equations.
b. What is the marginal propensity to consume in
this economy?
c. Suppose the central bank adjusts the money
supply to maintain the interest rate at 4 percent,
so r 5 4. Solve for GDP. How does it compare to
the full-employment level?
d. Assuming no change in monetary policy, what
change in government purchases would restore
full employment?
e. Assuming no change in fiscal policy, what change
in the interest rate would restore full employment?

8. An economy is producing output $400 billion
less than the natural level of output, and fiscal
policymakers want to close this recessionary gap.
The central bank agrees to adjust the money supply
to hold the interest rate constant, so there is no
crowding out. The marginal propensity to consume
is 4/5, and the price level is completely fixed in the
short run. In what direction and by how much
must government spending change to close the
recessionary gap? Explain your thinking.
9. Suppose government spending increases. Would
the effect on aggregate demand be larger if the Fed
held the money supply constant in response or if the
Fed committed to maintaining a fixed interest rate?
Explain.

QuickQuiz Answers
1. b

22718_Ch35_ptg01.indd 770

2. c

3. b

4. b

5. d

6. c

7. d

8. d

9. a

14/09/22 10:16 AM

Chapter

36

ROMAN SAMBORSKYI/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM; ARNO VAN ENGELAND/EYEEM/GETTY IMAGES

The Short-Run
Trade-Off between
Inflation and
Unemployment

nflation and unemployment are two of the most closely
watched indicators of economic performance. When the Bureau
of Labor Statistics releases data on these variables each month,
policymakers, stock and bond traders, and journalists often consider it big news. Some commentators have added together the
inflation rate and the unemployment rate to produce a misery
index, which they use to gauge the health of the economy.
How are these two measures of economic performance related?
Earlier in the book, we discussed the long-run determinants of
unemployment and inflation. The natural rate of unemployment
depends on various features of the labor market, such as job search,
minimum-wage laws, union power, and efficiency wages. By contrast, the inflation rate depends primarily on growth in the money
supply, which a nation’s central bank controls. In the long run,
inflation and unemployment are largely unrelated problems.
In the short run, though, the opposite is true. One of the Ten
Principles of Economics in Chapter 1 is that society faces a shortrun trade-off between inflation and unemployment. If monetary
and fiscal policymakers expand aggregate demand and move the

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 771

13/09/22 6:45 PM

772

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

economy up along the short-run aggregate-supply curve, they can expand output
and reduce unemployment for a while, but only at the cost of a more rapidly rising
price level. If policymakers contract aggregate demand and move the economy
down the short-run aggregate-supply curve, they can reduce inflation, but only
at the cost of temporarily lower output and higher unemployment.
This chapter examines the inflation–unemployment trade-off more closely. The
relationship between inflation and unemployment has attracted economists’ attention for many years. The best way to understand this relationship is to see how
their thinking about it has evolved. As we will see, the history of thought regarding
inflation and unemployment since the 1950s is inextricably connected to the history
of the U.S. economy. These two histories show why the trade-off between inflation
and unemployment holds in the short run, why it does not hold in the long run,
and what issues the trade-off raises for policymakers.

36-1 The Phillips Curve
Phillips curve
a curve that shows
the short-run trade-off
between inflation and
unemployment

“Probably the single most important macroeconomic relationship is the Phillips
curve.” These are the words of the economist George Akerlof from the lecture he
gave when he received the Nobel Prize in 2001. The Phillips curve is the short-run
relationship between inflation and unemployment. Our story begins with the discovery of the Phillips curve and its migration to America.

36-1a Origins of the Phillips Curve
In 1958, the economist A. W. Phillips published an article in the British journal
Economica that would make him famous. The article was titled “The Relationship
between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money Wages in the United
Kingdom, 1861–1957.” For the period he studied, Phillips showed a negative
correlation between the rate of unemployment and the rate of inflation. That is,
Phillips showed that years with low unemployment tend to have high inflation,
and years with high unemployment tend to have low inflation. (Phillips examined
inflation in nominal wages rather than inflation in prices. For our purposes, the
distinction is not important because these two measures of inflation usually move
together.) Phillips concluded that two important macroeconomic variables—
inflation and unemployment—were linked in a way that economists had not
previously appreciated.
Phillips’s discovery was based on data for the United Kingdom, but researchers
quickly extended his finding to other countries. Two years after Phillips published
his article, the economists Paul Samuelson and Robert Solow published an article
in the American Economic Review called “Analytics of Anti-Inflation Policy” in which
they showed a similar negative correlation between inflation and unemployment
in data for the United States. They reasoned that this correlation arose because low
unemployment was associated with high aggregate demand, which in turn put
upward pressure on wages and prices throughout the economy. Samuelson and
Solow dubbed the negative association between inflation and unemployment the
Phillips curve. Figure 1 shows an example of a Phillips curve like the one found
by Samuelson and Solow.
As the title of their paper suggests, Samuelson and Solow believed that Phillips’s
discovery held crucial lessons for policymakers. The Phillips curve, they suggested,
was a menu of possible economic outcomes. By altering monetary and fiscal policy
to influence aggregate demand, policymakers could choose any point on this curve.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 772

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

Figure 1
The Phillips Curve
The Phillips curve illustrates a negative
association between the inflation rate
and the unemployment rate. At point A,
inflation is low, and unemployment is
high. At point B, inflation is high, and
unemployment is low.

773

Inflation
Rate
(percent
per year)
6%

B

A

2%

Phillips curve
0

4%

7%

Unemployment
Rate (percent)

Point A offers high unemployment and low inflation. Point B offers low unemployment and high inflation. Policymakers might prefer both low inflation and low
unemployment, but the historical data summarized by the Phillips curve indicated
that this combination was unattainable. According to Samuelson and Solow, policymakers face a trade-off between inflation and unemployment, and the Phillips
curve illustrates that trade-off.

36-1b Aggregate Demand, Aggregate Supply,
and the Phillips Curve
The menu of possible outcomes described by the Phillips curve can be explained by
the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply. The Phillips curve shows
the combinations of inflation and unemployment that arise in the short run as
shifts in the aggregate-demand curve move the economy along the short-run
aggregate-supply curve. The previous two chapters showed that an increase in
the aggregate demand for goods and services leads, in the short run, to a larger
output of goods and services and a higher price level. Larger output means greater
employment and a lower rate of unemployment. In addition, a higher price level
translates into a higher rate of inflation. Thus, shifts in aggregate demand push
inflation and unemployment in opposite directions in the short run—a relationship
illustrated by the Phillips curve.
To see more fully how this works, consider an example. To keep the numbers
simple, imagine that the price level (as measured, for instance, by the consumer
price index) equals 100 in the year 2025. Figure 2 shows two possible outcomes
that might occur in the year 2026 depending on the strength of aggregate demand.
One outcome occurs if aggregate demand is high, and the other occurs if aggregate
demand is low. Panel (a) shows these two outcomes using the model of aggregate
demand and aggregate supply. Panel (b) shows the same two outcomes using the
Phillips curve.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 773

13/09/22 6:45 PM

774

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

This figure assumes a price level of 100 for the year 2025 and charts possible
outcomes for the year 2026. Panel (a) shows the model of aggregate demand
and aggregate supply. If aggregate demand is low, the economy is at point A.
Output is low (15,000), and the price level is low (102). If aggregate demand
is high, the economy is at point B. Output is high (16,000), and the price level
is high (106). Panel (b) shows the implications for the Phillips curve. Point A,
which arises when aggregate demand is low, has high unemployment (7 percent)
and low inflation (2 percent). Point B, which arises when aggregate demand is
high, has low unemployment (4 percent) and high inflation (6 percent).

Figure 2
How the Phillips Curve Is Related to
the Model of Aggregate Demand and
Aggregate Supply

(a) The Model of Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply
Price
Level

102

Inflation
Rate
(percent
per year)

Short-run
aggregate
supply

6%

B

106

B

A
High
aggregate demand
Low aggregate
demand

0

(b) The Phillips Curve

15,000
(unemployment
is 7%)

16,000
(unemployment
is 4%)

Quantity
of Output

A

2%

Phillips curve
0

4%
(output is
16,000)

7%
(output is
15,000)

Unemployment
Rate (percent)

Panel (a) of the figure shows what happens to output and the price level in the
year 2026. If the aggregate demand for goods and services is low, the economy experiences outcome A. The economy produces output of 15,000, and the price level is
102. By contrast, if aggregate demand is high, the economy experiences outcome B.
Output is 16,000, and the price level is 106. This is an example of a familiar conclusion: Higher aggregate demand moves the economy to an equilibrium with higher
output and a higher price level.
Panel (b) shows what these two possible outcomes mean for unemployment and
inflation. Because firms need more workers when they produce a greater output of
goods and services, unemployment is lower in outcome B than in outcome A. In this
example, when output rises from 15,000 to 16,000, unemployment falls from 7 percent
to 4 percent. Moreover, because the price level is higher at outcome B than at outcome
A, the inflation rate (the percentage change in the price level from the previous year)
is also higher. In this case, the price level was 100 in the year 2025, so outcome A has
an inflation rate of 2 percent, and outcome B has an inflation rate of 6 percent. The
two possible outcomes for the economy can be compared either in terms of output
and the price level (using the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply) or
in terms of unemployment and inflation (using the Phillips curve).
Because monetary and fiscal policy can shift the aggregate-demand curve, they
can move an economy along the Phillips curve. Increases in the money supply,

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 774

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

775

increases in government spending, or cuts in taxes expand aggregate demand and
move the economy to a point on the Phillips curve with higher inflation and lower
unemployment. Decreases in the money supply, cuts in government spending, or
increases in taxes contract aggregate demand and move the economy to a point on
the Phillips curve with lower inflation and higher unemployment. In this sense,
the Phillips curve offers policymakers a menu of combinations of inflation and
unemployment.

QuickQuiz
1. The Phillips curve started as an observed ________
correlation between the inflation rate and the
________.
a. positive; nominal interest rate
b. positive; unemployment rate
c. negative; nominal interest rate
d. negative; unemployment rate

2. When the Federal Reserve increases the money supply and expands aggregate demand, it moves the
economy along the Phillips curve to a point with
________ inflation and ________ unemployment.
a. higher; higher
b. higher; lower
c. lower; higher
d. lower; lower
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

36-2 Shifts in the Phillips Curve: The Role
of Expectations
The Phillips curve seems to offer policymakers a menu of inflation–unemployment
outcomes, but this raises a question: Does this set of possible choices remain constant over time? In other words, is the downward-sloping Phillips curve a stable
relationship on which policymakers can rely? Economists took up this issue in the
late 1960s, shortly after Samuelson and Solow introduced the Phillips curve into
the macroeconomic policy debate.

36-2a The Long-Run Phillips Curve
In 1968, the economist Milton Friedman published a paper in the American Economic
Review based on an address he had recently given as president of the American
Economic Association. The paper, titled “The Role of Monetary Policy,” contained
sections on “What Monetary Policy Can Do” and “What Monetary Policy Cannot
Do.” Friedman argued that one thing monetary policy cannot do, other than for a
short time, is lower unemployment by raising inflation. At about the same time,
another economist, Edmund Phelps, reached the same conclusion. Like Friedman,
Phelps published a paper denying the existence of a long-run trade-off between
inflation and unemployment.
Both Friedman and Phelps based their conclusions on classical principles of
macroeconomics. Classical theory points to growth in the money supply as the primary determinant of inflation. But classical theory also states that monetary growth
does not affect real variables such as output and employment; it merely alters all
prices and nominal incomes proportionately. In particular, monetary growth does
not influence the factors that determine the economy’s unemployment rate, such
as job search and efficiency wages. Friedman and Phelps concluded that, in the
long run, the rate of inflation and the rate of unemployment would not be related.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 775

13/09/22 6:45 PM

776

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Here, in his own words, is Friedman’s view about what the Federal Reserve can
hope to accomplish for the economy in the long run:
The monetary authority controls nominal quantities—directly, the quantity of
its own liabilities [currency plus bank reserves]. In principle, it can use this control to peg a nominal quantity—an exchange rate, the price level, the nominal
level of national income, the quantity of money by one definition or another—
or to peg the change in a nominal quantity—the rate of inflation or deflation,
the rate of growth or decline in nominal national income, the rate of growth of
the quantity of money. It cannot use its control over nominal quantities to peg
a real quantity—the real rate of interest, the rate of unemployment, the level
of real national income, the real quantity of money, the rate of growth of real
national income, or the rate of growth of the real quantity of money.
According to Friedman, monetary policymakers face a long-run Phillips curve that
is vertical, as in Figure 3. If the Fed increases the money supply slowly, the inflation
rate is low, and the economy finds itself at point A. If the Fed increases the money
supply quickly, the inflation rate is high, and the economy finds itself at point B.
In either case, the unemployment rate tends toward its normal level, called the
natural rate of unemployment. The vertical long-run Phillips curve illustrates the
conclusion that unemployment does not depend on money growth and inflation
in the long run.
The vertical long-run Phillips curve is, in essence, an expression of the classical
idea of monetary neutrality. Previously, we expressed monetary neutrality with a
vertical long-run aggregate-supply curve. Figure 4 shows that the vertical long-run
Phillips curve and the vertical long-run aggregate-supply curve are two sides of
the same coin. In panel (a) of this figure, an increase in the money supply shifts the
aggregate-demand curve to the right from AD1 to AD2. Because of this shift, the
long-run equilibrium moves from point A to point B. The price level rises from P1
to P2, but because the aggregate-supply curve is vertical, output remains the same.
In panel (b), more rapid growth in the money supply raises the inflation rate by

Figure 3

Inflation
Rate

The Long-Run Phillips Curve
According to Friedman and Phelps,
there is no trade-off between
inflation and unemployment in
the long run. Growth in the money
supply determines the inflation
rate. Regardless of the inflation
rate, the unemployment rate
gravitates toward its natural rate.
As a result, the long-run Phillips
curve is vertical.

1. When the
Fed increases
the growth rate
of the money
supply, the
rate of inflation
increases, . . .

High
inflation

B

Low
inflation

A

0

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 776

Long-run
Phillips curve

Natural rate of
unemployment

2. . . . but unemployment
remains at its natural rate
in the long run.

Unemployment
Rate

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

Panel (a) shows the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply with a vertical
aggregate-supply curve. When expansionary monetary policy shifts the aggregatedemand curve to the right from AD1 to AD2, the equilibrium moves from point A
to point B. The price level rises from P1 to P2, while output remains the same.
Panel (b) shows the long-run Phillips curve, which is vertical at the natural rate of
unemployment. In the long run, expansionary monetary policy moves the economy
from lower inflation (point A) to higher inflation (point B) without changing the rate of
unemployment.

Figure 4
How the Long-Run Phillips Curve Is
Related to the Model of Aggregate
Demand and Aggregate Supply

(a) The Model of Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply
Price
Level

2. . . . raises
the price
level, . . .

P2
P1

777

Inflation
Rate

Long-run aggregate
supply

B

(b) The Phillips Curve

3. . . . and
increases the
inflation rate, . . .

1. An increase in
the money supply
increases aggregate
demand, . . .

A

Long-run Phillips
curve

B
A

AD 2
Aggregate
demand, AD1

0

Natural level
of output

Quantity
of Output

0

Natural rate of
unemployment

Unemployment
Rate

4. . . . but leaves output at its natural level and
unemployment at its natural rate.

moving the economy from point A to point B. But because the Phillips curve is
vertical, the rate of unemployment is the same at these two points. Both the vertical long-run aggregate-supply curve and the vertical long-run Phillips curve imply
that monetary policy influences nominal variables (the price level and the inflation
rate) but not real ones (output and unemployment). In the long run, regardless of
the monetary policy pursued by the Fed, output is at its natural level, and unemployment is at its natural rate.

36-2b The Meaning of “Natural”
What is so “natural” about the natural rate of unemployment? Friedman and Phelps
used this adjective to describe the unemployment rate toward which the economy
gravitates in the long run. Yet the natural rate of unemployment is not necessarily
the socially desirable rate of unemployment. Nor is the natural rate of unemployment constant over time.
For example, suppose that a newly formed union uses its market power to
raise the real wages of some workers above the equilibrium level. The result is
an excess supply of workers and a higher natural rate of unemployment. This
unemployment is natural not because it is good but because it is beyond the
influence of monetary policy. More rapid money growth would reduce neither
the market power of the union nor the level of unemployment; it would lead
only to more inflation.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 777

13/09/22 6:45 PM

778

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Although monetary policy cannot influence the natural rate of unemployment,
other types of policy can. To reduce the natural rate of unemployment, policymakers
might look to policies that improve the functioning of the labor market. Earlier in
the book, we discussed how various labor-market policies, such as minimum-wage
laws, collective-bargaining laws, unemployment insurance, and job-training programs, can affect the natural rate of unemployment. A policy change that reduces
the natural rate of unemployment would shift the long-run Phillips curve to the
left. In addition, because lower unemployment means more workers are producing
goods and services, the quantity of goods and services supplied would be larger at
any given price level, and the long-run aggregate-supply curve would shift to the
right. The economy could then enjoy lower unemployment and higher output for
any given rate of money growth and inflation.

36-2c Reconciling Theory and Evidence
At first, Friedman and Phelps’s conclusion that there is no long-run trade-off
between inflation and unemployment might not seem convincing. Their argument was based on an appeal to theory, specifically classical theory’s prediction
of monetary neutrality. By contrast, the negative correlation between inflation
and unemployment documented by Phillips, Samuelson, and Solow was based on
actual evidence from the real world. Why should anyone believe that policymakers faced a vertical Phillips curve when the world seemed to offer a downwardsloping one? Shouldn’t the findings of Phillips, Samuelson, and Solow lead us to
reject monetary neutrality?
Friedman and Phelps were aware of these questions, and they offered a way
to reconcile classical macroeconomic theory with the finding of a downwardsloping Phillips curve in data from the United Kingdom and the United States.
They claimed that a negative relationship between inflation and unemployment
exists in the short run but that it cannot be used by policymakers as a menu of
outcomes in the long run. Policymakers can pursue expansionary monetary policy
to achieve lower unemployment for a while, but eventually, unemployment will
return to its natural rate. In the long run, more expansionary monetary policy
leads only to higher inflation.
Friedman and Phelps’s work was the basis of our discussion of the difference
between the short-run and long-run aggregate-supply curves in Chapter 34. As
you may recall, the long-run aggregate-supply curve is vertical, indicating that the
price level does not influence quantity supplied in the long run. But the short-run
aggregate-supply curve slopes upward, indicating that an increase in the price level
raises the quantity of goods and services that firms supply. According to the stickywage theory of aggregate supply, for instance, nominal wages are set in advance
based on the price level that workers and firms expect to prevail. When prices turn
out to be higher than expected, firms have an incentive to increase production and
employment; when prices are lower than expected, firms reduce production and
employment. Yet because the expected price level and nominal wages will eventually adjust, the positive relationship between the actual price level and quantity
supplied exists only in the short run.
Friedman and Phelps applied this same logic to the Phillips curve. Just as the
aggregate-supply curve slopes upward only in the short run, the trade-off between
inflation and unemployment holds only in the short run. And just as the long-run
aggregate-supply curve is vertical, the long-run Phillips curve is also vertical. Once
again, expectations are the key to understanding how the short run and the long
run are related.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 778

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

779

Friedman and Phelps introduced a new variable into the analysis of the
inflation–unemployment trade-off: expected inflation. Expected inflation measures
how much people expect the overall price level to change. Because the expected
price level affects nominal wages, expected inflation is one factor that determines
the position of the short-run aggregate-supply curve. In the short run, the Fed
can take expected inflation (and the short-run aggregate-supply curve) as already
determined. When the money supply changes, the aggregate-demand curve
shifts, and the economy moves along a given short-run aggregate-supply curve.
In the short run, therefore, monetary changes lead to unexpected fluctuations in
output, prices, unemployment, and inflation. In this way, Friedman and Phelps
explained the downward-sloping Phillips curve that Phillips, Samuelson, and
Solow had documented.
The Fed’s ability to create unexpected inflation by increasing the money supply exists only in the short run. In the long run, people come to expect whatever inflation rate the Fed chooses to produce, and nominal wages will adjust
to keep pace with inflation. As a result, the long-run aggregate-supply curve
is vertical. Changes in aggregate demand, such as those caused by changes in
monetary policy, affect neither the economy’s output of goods and services
nor the number of workers that firms need to hire to produce those goods and
services. Friedman and Phelps concluded that unemployment returns to its
natural rate in the long run.

36-2d The Short-Run Phillips Curve
The analysis of Friedman and Phelps can be summarized by the following equation:
Unemployment
rate

5

 Actual
Expected 
2 a
2
.
unemployment
inflation 
 inflation
Natural rate of

This equation relates the unemployment rate to the natural rate of unemployment,
actual inflation, and expected inflation. It is, in essence, another expression of the
aggregate-supply equation we have seen previously. In the short run, expected
inflation is given, so higher actual inflation is associated with lower unemployment.
(The variable a is a parameter that measures how much unemployment responds
to unexpected inflation.) In the long run, people come to expect whatever inflation
the Fed produces, so actual inflation equals expected inflation, and unemployment
is at its natural rate.
This equation implies there can be no stable short-run Phillips curve. Each shortrun Phillips curve reflects a particular expected rate of inflation. (To be precise, if
you graph the equation, you’ll find that the downward-sloping short-run Phillips
curve intersects the vertical long-run Phillips curve at the expected rate of inflation.)
When expected inflation changes, the short-run Phillips curve shifts.
According to Friedman and Phelps, it is dangerous to view the Phillips curve
as a menu of options available to policymakers. To see why, imagine an economy
that starts with low inflation, with an equally low rate of expected inflation, and
with unemployment at its natural rate. In Figure 5, the economy is at point A.
Now suppose that policymakers try to take advantage of the trade-off between
inflation and unemployment by using monetary or fiscal policy to expand aggregate demand. In the short run, when expected inflation is given, the economy
goes from point A to point B. Unemployment falls below its natural rate, and the
actual inflation rate rises above expected inflation. As the economy moves from

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 779

13/09/22 6:45 PM

780

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Figure 5
How Expected Inflation Shifts
the Short-Run Phillips Curve
The higher the expected rate of inflation,
the higher the curve representing the
short-run trade-off between inflation
and unemployment will be. At point A,
expected inflation and actual inflation are
equal at a low rate, and unemployment
is at its natural rate. If the Fed pursues
an expansionary monetary policy, the
economy moves from point A to point B
in the short run. At point B, expected
inflation is still low, but actual inflation is
high. Unemployment is below its natural
rate. In the long run, expected inflation
rises, and the economy moves to point C.
At point C, expected inflation and actual
inflation are both high, and unemployment
is back to its natural rate.

Inflation
Rate

2. . . . but in the long run, expected
inflation rises, and the short-run
Phillips curve shifts to the right.
Long-run
Phillips curve

B

C
Short-run Phillips curve
with high expected
inflation
A

1. Expansionary policy moves
the economy up along the
short-run Phillips curve . . .
0

Natural rate of
unemployment

Short-run Phillips curve
with low expected
inflation
Unemployment
Rate

point A to point B, policymakers might think they have achieved permanently
lower unemployment at the cost of higher inflation—a bargain that, if possible,
might be worth making.
This situation, however, will not persist. Over time, people get used to this higher
inflation rate and raise their expectations of inflation. When expected inflation rises,
firms and workers start taking higher inflation into account when setting wages
and prices. The short-run Phillips curve then shifts to the right, as shown in the
figure. The economy ends up at point C, with higher inflation than at point A but
with the same level of unemployment. Thus, Friedman and Phelps concluded that
policymakers face only a temporary trade-off between inflation and unemployment.
In the long run, expanding aggregate demand more rapidly will yield higher inflation without any reduction in unemployment.

36-2e The Natural Experiment for the Natural-Rate Hypothesis

natural-rate hypothesis
the claim that
unemployment eventually
returns to its normal, or
natural, rate, regardless of
the rate of inflation

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 780

Friedman and Phelps made a bold prediction in 1968: If policymakers try to take
advantage of the Phillips curve by choosing higher inflation to reduce unemployment, they will succeed at reducing unemployment only temporarily. This view—
that unemployment eventually returns to its natural rate regardless of the rate of
inflation—is called the natural-rate hypothesis. A few years after Friedman and
Phelps proposed this hypothesis, monetary and fiscal policymakers inadvertently
tested it in a natural experiment. Their laboratory was the U.S. economy.
Before examining the outcome of this test, let’s look at the data that Friedman
and Phelps were seeing when they made their prediction in 1968. Figure 6 shows
the unemployment and inflation rates from 1961 to 1968. These data trace out an
almost perfect Phillips curve. As inflation rose over these eight years, unemployment fell. The economic data from this era seemed to confirm that policymakers
faced a trade-off between inflation and unemployment.

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

Figure 6
The Phillips Curve in the 1960s
This figure uses annual data from 1961
to 1968 on the unemployment rate and
on the inflation rate (as measured by
the GDP deflator) to show the negative
relationship between inflation and
unemployment.
Source: U.S. Department of Labor; U.S. Department of Commerce.

781

Inflation Rate
(percent per year)
10%

8

6
1968

4
1967

2

1966
1962

1965
1964

0

1%

2

3

4

5

1961

1963

6

7

8

9

10

Unemployment
Rate (percent)

The apparent success of the Phillips curve in the 1960s made the prediction of Friedman and Phelps all the bolder. In 1958, Phillips suggested a negative association between inflation and unemployment. In 1960, Samuelson and
Solow showed that it existed in U.S. data. Another decade of data confirmed
the relationship. To some economists at the time, it seemed ridiculous to claim
that the reliable Phillips curve would start shifting once policymakers tried to
take advantage of it.
But that is exactly what happened. Beginning in the late 1960s, government policies expanded the aggregate demand for goods and services. In part, this expansion
was due to fiscal policy: Government spending rose as the Vietnam War heated up.
In part, it was due to monetary policy: Because the Fed tried to hold down interest
rates in the face of expansionary fiscal policy, the money supply (as measured by
M2) rose about 13 percent per year from 1970 to 1972, compared with 7 percent per
year in the early 1960s. As a result, inflation stayed high (about 5 to 6 percent per
year in the late 1960s and early 1970s, compared with about 1 to 2 percent per year
in the early 1960s). But as Friedman and Phelps had predicted, unemployment did
not stay low.
Figure 7 displays the history of inflation and unemployment from 1961 to 1973.
It shows that the simple negative relationship between these two variables started
to break down around 1970. As inflation remained high in the early 1970s, people’s
expectations of inflation caught up with reality, and the unemployment rate reverted
to the 5 percent to 6 percent range that had prevailed in the early 1960s. Notice
that the history illustrated in Figure 7 resembles the theory of a shifting short-run
Phillips curve shown in Figure 5. By 1973, policymakers learned that Friedman
and Phelps were right: There is no trade-off between inflation and unemployment
in the long run.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 781

13/09/22 6:45 PM

782

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Figure 7
The Breakdown of the Phillips Curve
This figure shows annual data from 1961
to 1973 on the unemployment rate and
on the inflation rate (as measured by
the GDP deflator). The Phillips curve
of the 1960s breaks down in the early
1970s, just as Friedman and Phelps had
predicted. Notice that the points labeled
A, B, and C in this figure correspond
roughly to the points in Figure 5.
Source: U.S. Department of Labor; U.S. Department of Commerce.

Inflation Rate
(percent per year)
10%

8

1973

6
1969
1968

4

1971

1970

1967

2

1962

1965

1%

2

3

1972

1966

1964

0

C

B

4

5

A

1961

1963

6

7

8

9

10

Unemployment
Rate (percent)

QuickQuiz
3. The natural rate of unemployment is
a. the socially optimal level of joblessness.
b. the level of joblessness the economy reaches in
the short run.
c. the amount of joblessness that cannot be reduced
by public policies.
d. the normal level of joblessness, regardless of
inflation.

4. If the Federal Reserve reduces the rate of money
growth and maintains it at the new lower rate, eventually, expected inflation will ________, and the
short-run Phillips curve will shift ________.
a. decrease; downward
b. decrease; upward
c. increase; downward
d. increase; upward
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

36-3 Shifts in the Phillips Curve: The Role of Supply Shocks
Friedman and Phelps suggested in 1968 that changes in expected inflation shift
the short-run Phillips curve, and the experience of the early 1970s convinced most
economists that Friedman and Phelps were right. Within a few years, however, the
economics profession would turn its attention to a different source of shifts in the
short-run Phillips curve: shocks to aggregate supply.
This time, the impetus for the change came not from two economics professors
but from an oil cartel. In 1974, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) began to exert its market power. The OPEC countries, including Saudi
Arabia, Kuwait, and Iraq, restricted the amount of crude oil they pumped and sold
on world markets. Within a few years, this reduction in supply caused the world
price of oil to almost double.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 782

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

A large increase in the world price of oil is an example of a supply shock, an
event that directly affects firms’ costs of production and the prices they charge.
Supply shocks shift the economy’s aggregate-supply curve and, as a result, the
Phillips curve. For example, when a cartel increases the price of crude oil, it raises
the cost of producing gasoline, heating oil, tires, and other products, reducing the
quantity of goods and services supplied at any given price level. As panel (a) of
Figure 8 shows, this reduction in supply is represented by the leftward shift in the
aggregate-supply curve from AS1 to AS2. Output falls from Y1 to Y2, and the price
level rises from P1 to P2. The economy experiences stagflation—a pernicious combination of falling output (stagnation) and rising prices (inflation).
This shift in aggregate supply is associated with a similar shift in the short-run
Phillips curve, shown in panel (b). Because firms need fewer workers to produce the
smaller output, employment falls, and unemployment rises. And because the price
level is higher, the inflation rate—the percentage change in the price level from the
previous year—is also higher. Thus, the shift in aggregate supply leads to higher
unemployment and higher inflation. The short-run trade-off between inflation and
unemployment shifts to the right from PC1 to PC2.
Confronted with an adverse shift in aggregate supply, policymakers face a difficult choice between fighting inflation and fighting unemployment. If they contract
aggregate demand to fight inflation, they will raise unemployment further. If they
expand aggregate demand to fight unemployment, they will raise inflation further. In other words, policymakers face a less favorable trade-off between inflation
and unemployment than they did before the shift in aggregate supply: They have

An Adverse Shock to Aggregate
Supply

(a) The Model of Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply
Price
Level

AS2

P2

Aggregate
supply, AS1

(b) The Phillips Curve
Inflation
Rate

A

1. An adverse
shift in aggregate
supply . . .

4. . . . giving policymakers
a less favorable trade-off
between unemployment
and inflation.

A
PC 2

Aggregate
demand
0

Y2

Y1
2. . . . lowers output . . .

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 783

an event that directly
alters firms’ costs and
prices, shifting the
economy’s aggregatesupply curve and thus
the Phillips curve

B

B

P1

supply shock

Panel (a) shows the model of aggregate demand and aggregate supply. When the
aggregate-supply curve shifts to the left from AS1 to AS2, the equilibrium moves
from point A to point B. Output falls from Y1 to Y2, and the price level rises from P1
to P2. Panel (b) shows the short-run trade-off between inflation and unemployment.
The adverse shift in aggregate supply moves the economy from a point with lower
unemployment and lower inflation (point A) to a point with higher unemployment and
higher inflation (point B). The short-run Phillips curve shifts to the right from PC1 to
PC2. Policymakers now face a worse set of options for inflation and unemployment.

Figure 8

3. . . . and
raises
the price
level, . . .

783

Phillips curve, PC 1
Quantity
of Output

0

Unemployment
Rate

13/09/22 6:45 PM

784

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

to live with a higher rate of inflation for a given rate of unemployment, a higher
rate of unemployment for a given rate of inflation, or some combination of higher
unemployment and higher inflation.
Faced with such an adverse shift in the Phillips curve, policymakers will ask
whether the shift is temporary or permanent. The answer depends on how people
adjust their expectations of inflation. If people view the rise in inflation from the
supply shock as a temporary aberration, expected inflation will not change, and the
Phillips curve will soon revert to its former position. But if people believe the shock
will lead to a new era of higher inflation, then expected inflation will rise, and the
Phillips curve will remain at its new, less desirable position.
In the United States during the 1970s, expected inflation did rise substantially. This
rise in expected inflation was partly attributable to the Fed’s decision to accommodate
the supply shock with higher money growth. (Recall that policymakers are said to
accommodate an adverse supply shock when they respond to it by increasing aggregate demand in an effort to keep output from falling.) Because of this policy decision,
the recession that resulted from the supply shock was smaller than it otherwise might
have been, but the U.S. economy faced an unfavorable trade-off between inflation and
unemployment for many years. The problem was compounded in 1979 when OPEC
once again started to exert its market power, more than doubling the price of oil.
Figure 9 shows inflation and unemployment in the U.S. economy during this period.
In 1980, after two OPEC supply shocks, the U.S. economy had an inflation rate of
more than 9 percent and an unemployment rate of about 7 percent. This combination
of inflation and unemployment was not at all near the trade-off that seemed possible
in the 1960s. Back then, the Phillips curve suggested that an unemployment rate of
7 percent would be associated with an inflation rate of only 1 percent; inflation of
more than 9 percent was unthinkable. With the misery index in 1980 near a historic
high, many people were unhappy with the economy’s performance. Something had
to be done, and soon it would be.

Figure 9
The Supply Shocks of the 1970s
This figure shows annual data from 1972
to 1981 on the unemployment rate
and on the inflation rate (as measured
by the GDP deflator). In the periods
1973–1975 and 1978–1981, increases
in world oil prices led to higher inflation
and higher unemployment.

Inflation Rate
(percent per year)
10%
1980
1974

1981

1975

1979

8

1978

6

1977

1973

1976

Source: U.S. Department of Labor; U.S. Department of Commerce.

4

1972

2

0

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 784

1%

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Unemployment
Rate (percent)

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

785

QuickQuiz
5. When an adverse supply shock shifts the short-run
aggregate-supply curve to the left, it also
a. moves the economy along the short-run Phillips
curve to a point with higher inflation and lower
unemployment.
b. moves the economy along the short-run Phillips
curve to a point with lower inflation and higher
unemployment.
c. shifts the short-run Phillips curve to the right.
d. shifts the short-run Phillips curve to the left.
6. From one year to the next, inflation falls from 5 to
4 percent, while unemployment rises from 6 to
7 percent. Which of the following events could be
responsible for this change?
a. The central bank increases the growth rate of the
money supply.
b. The government cuts spending and raises taxes to
reduce the budget deficit.

c. Newly discovered oil reserves cause world oil
prices to plummet.
d. The appointment of a new Fed chair increases
expected inflation.
7. From one year to the next, inflation falls from 5 to
4 percent, while unemployment falls from 7 to
6 percent. Which of the following events could be
responsible for this change?
a. The central bank increases the growth rate of the
money supply.
b. The government cuts spending and raises taxes to
reduce the budget deficit.
c. Newly discovered oil reserves cause world oil
prices to plummet.
d. The appointment of a new Fed chair increases
expected inflation.

Answers are at the end of the chapter.

36-4 The Cost of Reducing Inflation
In October 1979, as OPEC was imposing adverse supply shocks on the world’s
economies for the second time in a decade, Paul Volcker, then the Federal Reserve
chair, decided that the time for action had come. Volcker had been appointed by
President Carter only two months earlier, and he had taken the job knowing that
inflation had reached unacceptable levels. As guardian of the nation’s monetary
system, he felt he had little choice but to pursue a policy of disinflation. Disinflation
is a reduction in the rate of inflation, and it should not be confused with deflation,
a reduction in the price level. To draw an analogy to a car’s motion, disinflation is
like slowing down, whereas deflation is like going in reverse. Volcker wanted the
economy’s rising level of prices to slow down.
He had no doubt that the Fed could use the tools of monetary policy to reduce
inflation. But what would be the short-run cost? The answer to this question was
much less certain.

36-4a The Sacrifice Ratio
To reduce the inflation rate, the Fed has to pursue contractionary monetary policy.
Figure 10 shows some of the effects of such a decision. Other things being equal,
when the Fed slows growth in the money supply, it contracts aggregate demand.
A fall in aggregate demand, in turn, reduces the quantity of goods and services
that firms produce, leading to a rise in unemployment. The economy begins at
point A in the figure and moves along the short-run Phillips curve to point B,
which has lower inflation and higher unemployment. Over time, as people come
to understand that prices are rising more slowly, expected inflation falls, and the
short-run Phillips curve shifts downward. The economy moves from point B to
point C. Inflation is lower than it was initially at point A, and unemployment is
back at its natural rate.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 785

13/09/22 6:45 PM

786

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Figure 10
Disinflationary Monetary Policy in the
Short Run and Long Run
When the Fed pursues contractionary
monetary policy to reduce inflation, the
economy moves along a short-run Phillips
curve from point A to point B. Over time,
expected inflation falls, and the short-run
Phillips curve shifts downward. When the
economy reaches point C, unemployment
is back at its natural rate.

Inflation
Rate

Long-run
Phillips curve

1. Contractionary policy moves
the economy down along the
short-run Phillips curve, . . .

A
Short-run Phillips curve
with high expected
inflation
C

B
Short-run Phillips curve
with low expected
inflation

0

sacrifice ratio
the number of percentage
points of annual output
lost in the process of
reducing inflation by
1 percentage point

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 786

Natural rate of
unemployment

2. . . . but in the long run, expected
inflation falls, and the short-run
Phillips curve shifts to the left.

Unemployment
Rate

Thus, if a nation wants to reduce inflation, it must endure a period of high unemployment and low output. In Figure 10, this cost is represented by the movement
of the economy through point B as it travels from point A to point C. The size of
this cost depends on the slope of the Phillips curve and how quickly expectations
of inflation adjust to the new monetary policy.
Many studies have examined the data on inflation and unemployment to estimate
the cost of reducing inflation. The findings of these studies are often summarized in
a statistic called the sacrifice ratio. The sacrifice ratio is the number of percentage
points of annual output lost in the process of reducing inflation by 1 percentage point.
A typical estimate of the sacrifice ratio is 5. That is, for each percentage point that
inflation is reduced, 5 percent of annual output must be sacrificed in the transition.
Such estimates surely must have made Volcker apprehensive as he confronted the
task of reducing inflation. Inflation was running at almost 10 percent per year. To
reach moderate inflation of, say, 4 percent per year would mean reducing inflation
by 6 percentage points. If each percentage point costs 5 percent of the economy’s
annual output, then reducing inflation by 6 percentage points would require sacrificing 30 percent of annual output.
According to studies of the Phillips curve and the cost of disinflation, this sacrifice
could be paid in various ways. An immediate reduction in inflation would depress
output by 30 percent for a single year, an outcome that was surely too harsh even
for an inflation hawk like Volcker. It would be better, many argued, to spread out
the cost over several years. If the reduction in inflation took place over five years,
for instance, then output would have to average only 6 percent below trend during
that period to add up to a sacrifice of 30 percent. An even more gradual approach
would be to reduce inflation slowly over a decade so that output would have to be
only 3 percent below trend. Whatever path was chosen, however, it seemed that
reducing inflation would not be easy.

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

787

36-4b Rational Expectations and the Possibility
of Costless Disinflation
Just as Volcker was pondering how costly reducing inflation might be, a group of economics professors was leading an intellectual revolution that would challenge the conventional wisdom on the sacrifice ratio. This group included such prominent economists
as Robert Lucas, Thomas Sargent, and Robert Barro. Their revolution was based on a
new approach to economic theory and policy called rational expectations. According
to the theory of rational expectations, people optimally use all the information they
have, including information about government policies, when forecasting the future.
This approach has had profound implications for many areas of macroeconomics,
but none is more important than its application to the trade-off between inflation and
unemployment. As Friedman and Phelps had first emphasized, expected inflation
is an important variable that explains why there is a trade-off between inflation and
unemployment in the short run but not in the long run. How quickly the short-run
trade-off disappears depends on how quickly people adjust their expectations of
inflation. Proponents of rational expectations expanded upon the Friedman-Phelps
analysis to argue that when economic policies change, people adjust their expectations of inflation accordingly. The studies of inflation and unemployment that had
tried to estimate the sacrifice ratio had failed to take account of the direct effect of
the policy regime on expectations. As a result, estimates of the sacrifice ratio were,
according to the rational-expectations theorists, unreliable guides for policy.
In a 1981 paper titled “The End of Four Big Inflations,” Sargent described this
new view as follows:

rational expectations
the theory that people
optimally use all the
knowledge they have,
including information
about government
policies, when forecasting
the future

An alternative “rational expectations” view denies that there is any inherent
momentum to the present process of inflation. This view maintains that firms
and workers have now come to expect high rates of inflation in the future and
that they strike inflationary bargains in light of these expectations. However, it
is held that people expect high rates of inflation in the future precisely because
the government’s current and prospective monetary and fiscal policies warrant those expectations. . . . An implication of this view is that inflation can be
stopped much more quickly than advocates of the “momentum” view have
indicated and that their estimates of the length of time and the costs of stopping
inflation in terms of forgone output are erroneous. . . . This is not to say that
it would be easy to eradicate inflation. On the contrary, it would require more
than a few temporary restrictive fiscal and monetary actions. It would require a
change in the policy regime. . . . How costly such a move would be in terms of
forgone output and how long it would be in taking effect would depend partly
on how resolute and evident the government’s commitment was.
According to Sargent, the sacrifice ratio could be much smaller than suggested
by previous estimates. Indeed, in the most extreme case, it could be zero. The key
question was the credibility of the government and central bank. If policymakers
were sufficiently credible in their commitment to a policy of low inflation, people
would lower their expectations of inflation immediately. The short-run Phillips
curve would shift downward, and the economy would reach low inflation quickly
without the cost of temporarily high unemployment and low output.

36-4c The Volcker Disinflation
As we have seen, when Volcker faced the prospect of reducing inflation from its peak
of about 10 percent, the economics profession offered two conflicting predictions.
One group of economists offered estimates of the sacrifice ratio and concluded that

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 787

13/09/22 6:45 PM

788

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

reducing inflation would have great costs in terms of lost output and high unemployment. Another group offered the theory of rational expectations and concluded
that reducing inflation could be much less costly and, perhaps, could even have no
cost at all. Who was right?
Figure 11 shows inflation and unemployment from 1979 to 1987. As you can see,
Volcker did succeed at reducing inflation. It came down from almost 10 percent
in 1980 and 1981 to about 4 percent in 1983 and 1984. Credit for this reduction in
inflation goes completely to monetary policy. Fiscal policy at this time was acting
in the opposite direction: The increases in the budget deficit during the Reagan
administration expanded aggregate demand, which tends to raise inflation. The
fall in inflation from 1981 to 1984 is attributable to the tough anti-inflation policies
of the dogged Fed chair.
The figure shows that the Volcker disinflation came at the cost of high unemployment. In 1982 and 1983, the unemployment rate was about 10 percent—about
4 percentage points above its level when Volcker was appointed Fed chair. The
Volcker disinflation produced a recession that was then the deepest the United
States had experienced since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
Does this episode refute the rational-expectations theory of costless disinflation?
Some economists have argued that the answer to this question is a resounding yes.
Indeed, the pattern of disinflation shown in Figure 11 is like the pattern predicted in
Figure 10. As the economy transitioned from high inflation (point A in both figures)
to low inflation (point C), it experienced a painful period of high unemployment
(point B).
Yet there are two reasons not to reject the conclusions of the rational-expectations
theorists so quickly. First, even though the Volcker disinflation did impose a cost
of temporarily high unemployment, the cost was not as large as many economists
had predicted. Most estimates of the sacrifice ratio based on the Volcker disinflation

Figure 11
The Volcker Disinflation
This figure shows unemployment and
inflation from 1979 to 1987. The
reduction in inflation (as measured by
the GDP deflator) came at the cost of
very high unemployment in 1982 and
1983. Note that the points labeled A, B,
and C in this figure correspond roughly to
the points in Figure 10.
Source: U.S. Department of Labor; U.S. Department of Commerce.

Inflation Rate
(percent per year)
10%

1980
1979

8

1982

6
1984

4

1987

C
2

0

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 788

1981

A

1%

2

3

4

5

6

B

1983

1985
1986

7

8

9

10

Unemployment
Rate (percent)

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

789

are smaller than estimates that had been obtained from previous data. Perhaps
Volcker’s tough stand on inflation did have a direct effect on expectations, as the
rational-expectations theorists claimed.
Second, and more importantly, even though Volcker announced that he would
aim monetary policy to lower inflation, much of the public did not believe him.
Because few people thought Volcker would reduce inflation as quickly as he did,
expected inflation did not fall immediately; as a result, the short-run Phillips curve
did not shift down as quickly as it might have. Some evidence for this hypothesis
comes from the forecasts made by commercial forecasting firms: Their forecasts
of inflation fell more slowly in the 1980s than did actual inflation. For that reason,
the Volcker disinflation does not necessarily refute the rational-expectations view
that credible disinflation can be costless. It does show, however, that policymakers cannot count on people to immediately believe them when they announce a
policy of disinflation, especially if it marks a major departure from the policy that
preceded it. Rational people may doubt policymakers’ commitment to low inflation
without concrete evidence, which Volcker ultimately provided with his relentless
determination.

QuickQuiz
8. Reducing inflation will tend to be costly if
a. policymakers are credibly committed to low
inflation.
b. wages and prices are not very sticky.
c. expectations of inflation are slow to adjust.
d. central bankers exhibit a strong dislike of
inflation.

9. Advocates of the theory of rational expectations
believe that
a. the sacrifice ratio can be much smaller if policymakers make a credible commitment to low inflation.
b. if disinflation catches people by surprise, it will
have minimal impact on unemployment.
c. wage and price setters never expect the central
bank to follow through on its announcements.
d. expected inflation depends on the rates of inflation that people have recently observed.
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

36-5 Recent History
More recent history can be divided into three periods: the Greenspan era, the Great
Recession, and the pandemic.

36-5a The Greenspan Era
After the OPEC inflation of the 1970s and the Volcker disinflation of the 1980s, the
U.S. economy experienced relatively mild fluctuations in inflation and unemployment. Figure 12 shows inflation and unemployment from 1984 to 2005. This can
be called the Greenspan era after Alan Greenspan, who, in 1987, followed Paul
Volcker as chair of the Federal Reserve and remained in that position for more
than 18 years.
This period began with a favorable supply shock. In 1986, OPEC members argued
over production levels, and their agreement to restrict supply broke down. Oil prices
fell by about half. As the figure shows, this favorable supply shock led to a fall in
inflation and unemployment from 1984 to 1986.
Throughout the Greenspan era, the Fed was careful to avoid repeating the mistakes of the 1960s, when excessive aggregate demand pushed unemployment below

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 789

13/09/22 6:45 PM

790

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Figure 12

Inflation Rate
(percent per year)

The Greenspan Era
This figure shows annual data from 1984
to 2005 on the unemployment rate and
on the inflation rate (as measured by
the GDP deflator). During most of this
period, Alan Greenspan was chair of the
Federal Reserve. Fluctuations in inflation
and unemployment were relatively small.

10%

8

6

Source: U.S. Department of Labor; U.S. Department of Commerce.

4

2005

1991
1987

2001 2004 1994
2000 1997
1993
1999
2003
1996
2002
1998
1995

2

0

1989 1990
1988

1%

2

3

4

5

6

7

1984
1985
1992
1986

8

9

10

Unemployment
Rate (percent)

the natural rate and raised inflation. When unemployment fell and inflation rose
in 1989 and 1990, the Fed raised interest rates and contracted aggregate demand,
leading to a small recession in 1991 and 1992. Unemployment rose above most
estimates of the natural rate, and inflation fell once again.
The rest of the 1990s witnessed a technological boom and a period of economic
prosperity. Inflation gradually drifted downward, approaching zero by the end of
the decade. Unemployment also fell, leading many observers to believe that the
natural rate of unemployment had fallen. Part of the credit for this good economic
performance went to Greenspan and his colleagues at the Fed, for low inflation
can be achieved only with prudent monetary policy. But good luck in the form of
favorable supply shocks was also part of the story.
In 2001, however, the economy ran into problems. The end of the dot-com stock
market bubble, the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and corporate accounting scandals all
depressed aggregate demand. Unemployment rose during the first recession in
a decade. But a combination of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies helped
end the downturn, and by early 2005, unemployment was close to most estimates
of the natural rate.
In 2005, President Bush nominated Ben Bernanke to succeed Alan Greenspan
as Fed chair. Bernanke was sworn in on February 1, 2006. In 2009, Bernanke was
reappointed by President Obama. At the time of his initial nomination, Bernanke
said, “My first priority will be to maintain continuity with the policies and policy
strategies established during the Greenspan years.”

36-5b The Great Recession
Bernanke may have hoped to continue the policies of the Greenspan era and to
enjoy the relative calm of those years, but his wishes would not be fulfilled. During
his first few years on the job, the new Fed chair faced some daunting challenges.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 790

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

791

As previous chapters discussed, the main problems arose in the housing market
and financial system. From 1995 to 2006, the U.S. housing market boomed, and
average U.S. house prices more than doubled. But the boom was unsustainable,
and from 2006 to 2009, house prices plummeted by about one-third. This large fall
led to declines in household wealth and difficulties for many financial institutions
that had bet (through the purchase of mortgage-backed securities) that house prices
would continue to rise. It set off a financial crisis that resulted in a large decline in
aggregate demand and a steep increase in unemployment.
We have previously looked at the story of the crisis and the policy responses to
it, but Figure 13 shows what these events meant for inflation and unemployment.
From 2007 to 2010, as the decline in aggregate demand raised unemployment from
less than 5 percent to about 10 percent, it also reduced the rate of inflation from
3 percent in 2006 to less than 1 percent in 2009, the lowest inflation in more than
a half-century. In essence, the economy rode down the short-run Phillips curve.
After 2010, the economy slowly recovered from the Great Recession, and the job
of Fed chair passed from Bernanke to Janet Yellen in 2014 and then to Jerome Powell
in 2018. Unemployment gradually declined, while the rate of inflation remained
between 1 and 2 percent. By 2018 and 2019, the unemployment rate had fallen to
less than 4 percent, and inflation had risen slightly to about 2 percent—the Fed’s
announced target.
One notable feature of this period was the absence of sizeable shifts in the
short-run Phillips curve. The very low inflation of 2009 and 2010 appears not
to have substantially reduced expected inflation, which might have shifted the
short-run Phillips curve downward. Similarly, the low unemployment during
2018 and 2019 increased inflation somewhat, but it did not increase expected
inflation, which could have shifted the short-run Phillips curve upward. Instead,
expected inflation remained steady at about 2 percent, keeping the short-run
Phillips curve relatively stable.

Figure 13
The Phillips Curve during
and after the Recession of
2008–2009
This figure shows annual data
from 2006 to 2019 on the
unemployment rate and on the
inflation rate (as measured by
the GDP deflator). A financial
crisis caused aggregate demand
to plummet, leading to much
higher unemployment and
pushing inflation down to a very
low level.
Source: U.S. Department of Labor; U.S. Department of
Commerce.

Inflation Rate
(percent per year)
10%

8

6

4

2

0

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 791

2006
2007
2008 2013 2011
2017
2012
2019
2014
2010
2016 2015
2009
2018

1%

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Unemployment
Rate (percent)

13/09/22 6:45 PM

792

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

Ask the
Experts

The Inflation
of 2021–2022

“The supply bottlenecks that are currently contributing to rising
prices can be reasonably expected to abate without causing
inflation over the longer term to be above the Fed’s target.”

A common explanation for this stability is that since Volcker’s
success in fighting inflation, the Federal Reserve had established
substantial credibility in its commitment to keep inflation at about
2 percent. This credibility kept expected inflation well-anchored.
As a result, the position of the short-run Phillips curve reacted
less to short-run events.

36-5c The Pandemic

The long expansion after the recession of 2008–2009 was cut short
in 2020 when the coronavirus pandemic led to a sharp recession, as discussed earlier in the book. The pandemic affected both
aggregate demand and aggregate supply as well as both inflation
and unemployment.
The initial impact on aggregate demand was contractionary.
People were told to avoid shopping, eating at restaurants, flying
for business or personal reasons, and other economic activities
that require close personal contact. From February to April of
“The current combination of U.S. fiscal and monetary policy
2020, the unemployment rate jumped from 3.5 to 14.8 percent. The
poses a serious risk of prolonged higher inflation.”
consumer price index fell by 1 percent over those two months,
indicating a brief period of deflation.
But aggregate demand recovered quickly. The recovery was
partly attributable to the relaxation of restrictions. It was also
partly attributable to expansionary monetary and fiscal policies.
The Fed cut interest rates to about zero, and Congress passed a
series of relief bills under Presidents Trump and Biden.
The pandemic’s impact on aggregate supply was consistently
adverse. Early in the pandemic, many non-essential businesses
“A significant factor behind today’s higher US inflation is domiwere told to close. Even after the restrictions were relaxed, many
nant corporations in uncompetitive markets taking advantage
people were reluctant to return to work. For example, the numof their market power to raise prices in order to increase their
ber of retirements in 2020 was twice that in 2019. The labor-force
profit margins.”
participation rate for those 55 and older declined by about 2 percentage points early in the pandemic and had not recovered by
the end of 2021. At the same time, the pandemic disrupted global
supply chains. The inability of some businesses to obtain critical
inputs further contracted aggregate supply.
By the end of 2021, the unemployment rate was back below
5 percent, but the combination of the adverse supply shocks and
the expansion in aggregate demand from monetary and fiscal
policy increased inflation. The 12-month inflation rate, as meaSource: IGM Economic Experts Panel, November 23, 2021, January 11, 2022.
sured by the consumer price index, rose to 7.5 percent in January
2022, the highest rate in 40 years.
Policymakers initially said that the inflation surge would be transitory. They
thought that inflation would subside as supply-chain disruptions were fixed.
Some economists, however, worried that the monetary and fiscal expansion had
been excessive and that inflation would not soon return to the Fed’s target of
2 percent.
The outcome was unclear as this book was going to press. Part of the resolution
would come from the behavior of expected inflation. If the Fed maintained the credibility it had earned since Volcker, the high inflation might indeed be short-lived.
But if expectations became unanchored, the Phillips curve might shift, leading to a
persistently less favorable trade-off between inflation and unemployment.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 792

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

793

QuickQuiz
10. The financial crisis of 2008–2009 that led to the
Great Recession reduced aggregate ________, which
tends to ________ the Phillips curve.
a. supply; shift
b. supply; move the economy along
c. demand; shift
d. demand; move the economy along

11. The increase in retirements during the pandemic of
2020 reduced aggregate ________, which tends to
________ inflation.
a. supply; increase
b. supply; decrease
c. demand; increase
d. demand; decrease
Answers are at the end of the chapter.

36-6 Conclusion
This chapter has examined how economists’ thinking about inflation and unemployment has evolved. We have discussed the ideas of many of the best economists
of the 20th century: from the Phillips curve of Phillips, Samuelson, and Solow, to
the natural-rate hypothesis of Friedman and Phelps, to the rational-expectations
theory of Lucas, Sargent, and Barro. Six members of this group won Nobel Prizes
for their work in economics.
The trade-off between inflation and unemployment has generated much intellectual turmoil, but certain principles command consensus. Here is how Milton
Friedman expressed the relationship between inflation and unemployment in 1968:
There is always a temporary tradeoff between inflation and unemployment;
there is no permanent tradeoff. The temporary tradeoff comes not from inflation per se, but from unanticipated inflation, which generally means, from a
rising rate of inflation. The widespread belief that there is a permanent tradeoff
is a sophisticated version of the confusion between “high” and “rising” that we
all recognize in simpler forms. A rising rate of inflation may reduce unemployment, a high rate will not.
But how long, you will say, is “temporary”? . . . I can at most venture a personal judgment, based on some examination of the historical evidence, that the
initial effects of a higher and unanticipated rate of inflation last for something
like two to five years.
Today, more than a half-century later, this statement still reflects the view of most
macroeconomists.

Chapter in a Nutshell
• The Phillips curve describes a negative relationship
between inflation and unemployment. By expanding
aggregate demand, policymakers can choose a point
on the Phillips curve with higher inflation and lower
unemployment. By contracting aggregate demand,
policymakers can choose a point with lower inflation
and higher unemployment.
• The trade-off between inflation and unemployment
described by the Phillips curve holds only in the short

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 793

run. In the long run, expected inflation adjusts to
changes in actual inflation, and the short-run Phillips
curve shifts. As a result, the long-run Phillips curve is
vertical at the natural rate of unemployment.
• The short-run Phillips curve also shifts because of
shocks to aggregate supply. An adverse supply shock,
such as an increase in world oil prices, gives policymakers a less favorable trade-off between inflation and
unemployment. That is, after an adverse supply shock,

13/09/22 6:45 PM

794

Part XII Short-Run Economic Fluctuations

policymakers have to accept a higher rate of inflation
for any given rate of unemployment or a higher rate of
unemployment for any given rate of inflation.
• When the Fed contracts growth in the money supply to reduce inflation, it moves the economy along
the short-run Phillips curve, resulting in temporarily

high unemployment. The cost of disinflation depends
on how quickly expectations of inflation fall. Some
economists argue that a credible commitment to low
inflation can reduce the cost of disinflation by inducing
a quick adjustment of expectations.

Key Concepts
Phillips curve, p. 772
natural-rate hypothesis, p. 780

supply shock, p. 783
sacrifice ratio, p. 786

rational expectations, p. 787

Questions for Review
1. Draw the short-run trade-off between inflation
and unemployment. How might the Fed move the
economy from one point on this curve to another?
2. Draw the long-run trade-off between inflation and
unemployment. Explain how the short-run and longrun trade-offs are related.
3. What is “natural” about the natural rate of
unemployment? Why might the natural rate of
unemployment differ across countries?

4. Suppose a drought destroys farm crops and
drives up the price of food. What is the effect
on the short-run trade-off between inflation and
unemployment?
5. The Fed decides to reduce inflation. Use the Phillips
curve to show the short-run and long-run effects
of this policy. How might the short-run costs be
reduced?

Problems and Applications
1. Suppose the natural rate of unemployment is
6 percent. On one graph, draw two Phillips curves
that describe the four situations listed here. Label
the point that shows the position of the economy in
each case.
a. Actual inflation is 5 percent, and expected
inflation is 3 percent.
b. Actual inflation is 3 percent, and expected
inflation is 5 percent.
c. Actual inflation is 5 percent, and expected
inflation is 5 percent.
d. Actual inflation is 3 percent, and expected
inflation is 3 percent.
2. Illustrate the effects of the following developments
on both the short-run and long-run Phillips curves.
Give the economic reasoning underlying your
answers.

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 794

a. a rise in the natural rate of unemployment
b. a decline in the price of imported oil
c. a rise in government spending
d. a decline in expected inflation
3. Suppose that a fall in consumer spending causes a
recession.
a. Illustrate the immediate change in the economy
using both an aggregate-supply/aggregatedemand diagram and a Phillips-curve diagram.
On both graphs, label the initial long-run
equilibrium as point A and the resulting short-run
equilibrium as point B. What happens to inflation
and unemployment in the short run?
b. Now suppose that over time, expected inflation
changes in the same direction that actual inflation
changes. What happens to the position of the
short-run Phillips curve? After the recession is

13/09/22 6:45 PM

Chapter 36 The Short-Run Trade-Off between Inflation and Unemployment

795

actual natural rate is 5 percent. If the Fed based its
policy decisions on its belief, what would happen to
the economy? How might the Fed come to realize
that its belief about the natural rate was mistaken?

over, does the economy face a better or worse
set of inflation–unemployment combinations?
Explain.
4. Suppose the economy is in a long-run equilibrium.
a. Draw the economy’s short-run and long-run
Phillips curves.
b. Suppose a wave of business pessimism reduces
aggregate demand. Show the effect of this
shock on your diagram from part (a). If the Fed
undertakes expansionary monetary policy, can it
return the economy to its original inflation rate
and original unemployment rate?
c. Now suppose the economy is back in long-run
equilibrium, and then the price of imported oil
rises. Show the effect of this shock with a new
diagram like that in part (a). If the Fed undertakes
expansionary monetary policy, can it return the
economy to its original inflation rate and original
unemployment rate? If the Fed undertakes
contractionary monetary policy, can it return the
economy to its original inflation rate and original
unemployment rate? Explain why this situation
differs from that in part (b).

7. Suppose the Federal Reserve announced that it
would pursue contractionary monetary policy to
reduce inflation. For each of the following conditions,
explain whether it would make the ensuing recession
more or less severe.
a. Wage contracts have short durations.
b. There is little confidence in the Fed’s
determination to reduce inflation.
c. Expectations of inflation adjust quickly to actual
inflation.
8. In 2008, the Federal Reserve faced a decrease in
aggregate demand caused by the housing and
financial crises and a decrease in short-run aggregate
supply caused by rising commodity prices.
a. Starting from a long-run equilibrium, illustrate
the effects of these two changes using both an
aggregate-supply/aggregate-demand diagram and
a Phillips-curve diagram. On both diagrams, label
the initial long-run equilibrium as point A and the
resulting short-run equilibrium as point B. For each
of the following variables, state whether it rises or
falls or whether the impact is ambiguous: output,
unemployment, the price level, the inflation rate.
b. Suppose the Fed responds quickly to these
shocks and adjusts monetary policy to keep
unemployment and output at their natural rates.
What action would it take? On the same set of
graphs from part (a), show the results. Label the
new equilibrium as point C.
c. Why might the Fed choose not to pursue the
course of action described in part (b)?

5. The inflation rate is 10 percent, and the central bank
is considering slowing the rate of money growth
to reduce inflation to 5 percent. Economist Milton
believes that expectations of inflation change quickly
in response to new policies, whereas economist
James believes that expectations are very sluggish.
Which economist is more likely to favor the proposed
change in monetary policy? Why?
6. Suppose the Federal Reserve’s policy is to maintain
low and stable inflation by keeping unemployment
at its natural rate. However, the Fed believes that the
natural rate of unemployment is 4 percent when the

QuickQuiz Answers
1. d

22718_Ch36_ptg01.indd 795

2. b

3. d

4. a

5. c

6. b

7. c

8. c

9. a

10. d

11. a

13/09/22 6:45 PM

